
[Illustration: JACK MANAGED TO GET THE BALL AND START WITH IT FOR
THE GOAL.

_The Rover Boys at Colby Hall._  _Frontispiece--Page_ 223]




THE ROVER BOYS AT COLBY HALL

OR

_THE STRUGGLES OF THE YOUNG CADETS_



By

ARTHUR M. WINFIELD
(Edward Stratemeyer)


AUTHOR OF "THE ROVER BOYS AT SCHOOL," "THE ROVER
BOYS ON THE OCEAN," "THE PUTNAM HALL SERIES," ETC.



_ILLUSTRATED_



NEW YORK
GROSSET & DUNLAP
PUBLISHERS

Made in the United States of America




BOOKS BY ARTHUR M. WINFIELD
(Edward Stratemeyer)


THE FIRST ROVER BOYS SERIES

THE ROVER BOYS AT SCHOOL
THE ROVER BOYS ON THE OCEAN
THE ROVER BOYS IN THE JUNGLE
THE ROVER BOYS OUT WEST
THE ROVER BOYS ON THE GREAT LAKES
THE ROVER BOYS IN THE MOUNTAINS
THE ROVER BOYS IN CAMP
THE ROVER BOYS ON LAND AND SEA
THE ROVER BOYS ON THE RIVER
THE ROVER BOYS ON THE PLAINS
THE ROVER BOYS IN SOUTHERN WATERS
THE ROVER BOYS ON THE FARM
THE ROVER BOYS ON TREASURE ISLE
THE ROVER BOYS AT COLLEGE
THE ROVER BOYS DOWN EAST
THE ROVER BOYS IN THE AIR
THE ROVER BOYS IN NEW YORK
THE ROVER BOYS IN ALASKA
THE ROVER BOYS IN BUSINESS
THE ROVER BOYS ON A TOUR


THE SECOND ROVER BOYS SERIES

THE ROVER BOYS AT COLBY HALL


THE PUTNAM HALL SERIES

THE PUTNAM HALL CADETS
THE PUTNAM HALL RIVALS
THE PUTNAM HALL CHAMPIONS
THE PUTNAM HALL REBELLION
THE PUTNAM HALL ENCAMPMENT
THE PUTNAM HALL MYSTERY


12mo. Cloth. Illustrated.

GROSSET & DUNLAP, Publishers, New York

COPYRIGHT, 1917, BY
EDWARD STRATEMEYER


_The Rover Boys at Colby Hall_




INTRODUCTION


MY DEAR BOYS: This book is a complete story in itself, but forms the
first volume in a line issued under the general title, "The Second
Rover Boys Series for Young Americans."

As mentioned in several of the other volumes of the first series, this
line was started a number of years ago with the publication of "The
Rover Boys at School," in which my readers were introduced to Dick,
Tom, and Sam Rover, three wide-awake American lads. In that volume and
in those which followed I gave the particulars of their adventures
while attending Putnam Hall Military Academy, Brill College, and while
on numerous outings, both in our own country and abroad.

The Rover boys were, of course, growing older; and, having met three
young ladies very much to their liking, each married and settled down,
as related in detail in the several volumes immediately preceding this.
They were well established in business; and in due course of time Dick
Rover was blessed with a son, as was also Sam, while the fun-loving Tom
became the proud possessor of a pair of twins who were as full of life
as their father had ever been.

In this volume the younger Rover boys are old enough to go to boarding
school. They are sent to Colby Hall Military Academy, presided over by
an old friend and schoolmate of their fathers; and there they make both
friends and enemies, and have numerous adventures.

In the beginning this chronicle of the younger Rovers, I wish to thank
my numerous readers for all the kind things they have said about the
other volumes in these series, and I trust that they will make just as
good friends of Jack, Andy and Randy, and Fred as they did of Dick,
Tom, and Sam Rover.

Affectionately and sincerely yours,

EDWARD STRATEMEYER.




CONTENTS


                                                             PAGE

     I INTRODUCING THE YOUNGER ROVERS                           1

    II SOMETHING OF THE PAST                                   13

   III WHAT FOLLOWED ANOTHER TRICK                             24

    IV JACK IN WALL STREET                                     35

     V GETTING READY TO LEAVE                                  45

    VI ON THE TRAIN                                            54

   VII A SCENE IN THE DINING CAR                               65

  VIII AT COLBY HALL                                           76

    IX THE MISSING SUITCASE                                    88

     X GETTING ACQUAINTED                                      98

    XI DOWN IN THE CORNFIELD                                  109

   XII LEARNING TO DRILL                                      119

  XIII FRED IS FOLLOWED                                       129

   XIV THE FIGHT                                              139

    XV IN THE TOWN                                            148

   XVI AT THE MOVING PICTURE THEATER                          157

  XVII THE GIRLS FROM CLEARWATER HALL                         167

 XVIII SLUGGER BROWN IS EXPOSED                               178

   XIX A SQUALL ON THE LAKE                                   187

    XX IN GREAT PERIL                                         197

   XXI ASSISTANCE REFUSED                                     206

  XXII THE MEETING WITH HIXLEY HIGH                           216

 XXIII TARGET PRACTICE                                        226

  XXIV THE FUN OF HALLOWE'EN                                  235

   XXV OFF ON A HUNT                                          245

  XXVI FROM ONE TROUBLE TO ANOTHER                            254

 XXVII ELIAS LACY'S DEMAND                                    265

XXVIII IN THE GUARDROOM                                       274

  XXIX THE EXPOSURE                                           284

   XXX A FOOTBALL VICTORY--CONCLUSION                         296




THE ROVER BOYS AT COLBY HALL


CHAPTER I

INTRODUCING THE YOUNGER ROVERS


"For gracious sake! what's that racket?" exclaimed Dick Rover, as he
threw down the newspaper he was reading and leaped to his feet.

"Sounds to me as if there was a battle royal going on," returned his
younger brother, Sam, who was at a desk in the library of the old
farmhouse, writing a letter.

"It's those boys!" exclaimed Tom Rover, as he tossed aside a copy of a
comic paper which he had been looking over. "I'll wager they're up to
some mischief again."

"Well, if they are your boys, Tom, you mustn't find fault with them,"
answered Sam Rover, with a twinkle in his eye. "If ever there were
chips of the old block, your twins are It with a capital I."

"Humph!" snorted Tom Rover. "I don't think Andy and Randy are much
ahead of your Fred when it comes to playing tricks, and I think Dick's
Jack can hold up his end too."

"Never mind about that just now," broke in Dick Rover, hastily. "Let's
go out and see what those kids are up to."

"All right. But don't be too severe with 'em," pleaded Tom Rover.
"Remember, boys will be boys."

"That's true, Tom. But we've got to take 'em in hand sooner or later,"
remonstrated his brother Sam. "If we don't, they'll grow up the wildest
bunch ever known."

A number of cries of alarm and protest, mingled with fierce cheering,
had reached the house from the garden just beyond the broad veranda. As
the three Rover brothers hurried through the hallway and outside, the
yelling and cheering were renewed. Then, just as Tom Rover stepped out
on the veranda, there was a sudden swish and a stream of water from a
garden hose caught him directly in the left ear.

"Hi! Hi! Stop that!" cried Tom Rover, doing his best to dodge the
stream of water, which suddenly seemed to play all over the piazza.
"What do you mean by wetting me this way?"

"It wasn't my fault, Dad," came from a boy standing on the lawn, both
hands clutching a rubber hose held, also, by another boy of about the
same age. "It was Fred who turned the hose that way."

"Nothing of the sort! It was Randy twisted it that way trying to get it
away from me," cried Fred Rover. "And he isn't going to do it!" and
thereupon ensued a struggle between the two boys which caused the
stream of water to fly over the garden first in one direction and then
another.

In the meanwhile, not far away another stream of water was issuing from
a hose held by two other lads. This, as well as the water from hose
number one, had been directed towards the back of the garden, where an
elderly white man and an equally elderly colored man were trying to
shelter themselves behind a low hedge to keep from becoming drenched.

"Fo' de lan's' sake, Massa Dick! won't you make dem boys stop?" cried
out the old colored man, when he caught sight of Dick Rover hurrying
out on the lawn. "Dem boys is jest nacherly tryin' to drown old Aleck
Pop, dat's what dey is!"

"They didn't have no call to touch them hoses," came from the elderly
white man. "I tol' 'em they mustn't muss with the water; but they won't
mind nohow!" and thus speaking old Jack Ness held up his hands in comic
despair.

"Why! we didn't know you were behind the hedge," came from one of the
boys holding the second hose. "We thought you were both down at the
barn."

"You can't make believe like that, Andy Rover!" returned the old man of
all work, shaking his head vigorously. "You knowed I was goin' to trim
up this hedge a bit and that Aleck was goin' to help me."

"You boys let up with this nonsense," came sternly from Tom Rover. He
turned to face one of his twins. "Randy, I ought to give you a
thrashing for wetting me like this."

"Don't Fred get half the thrashing?" questioned Randy Rover,
quizzically, for he could readily see that his parent was not as angry
as his words seemed to imply. "I don't like to be selfish, you know. He
can have more than his share if he wants it."

"You'll take your own thrashings--I don't want 'em," broke in his
cousin Fred quickly.

"Jack," cried Dick Rover, turning to his son, "turn that water off at
once."

"I don't know where to turn it off. I didn't turn it on," answered Jack
Rover, the oldest of the four boys who had been fooling.

"I'll turn it off and fix it so they can't turn it on ag'in," came from
old Jack Ness, and away hobbled the man of all work.

"I think it's a shame for you boys to drench old Ness and Aleck," was
Sam Rover's sober comment. "Both of them might catch cold or get
rheumatism."

"We didn't start to do anything like that, Dad," answered Fred Rover.
"We were going to have a little fight between ourselves, playing rival
firemen. We aimed the water at the hedge, and we didn't see Ness and
Aleck until they let out a yell."

"But I saw two of you playing the water in that direction," cried Dick
Rover. "You were one of them, Jack."

"Oh, well, Dad, what was the harm after they were all wet?" pleaded his
son. "They'd have to change their clothing anyway."

"That's just it," added Andy Rover quickly, with his eyes twinkling
from merriment. "A little more water won't hurt a person when he's
already soaked. It's just like spoiling a rotten egg--it can't be
done," and at this reply, both Dick Rover and his brother, the
fun-loving Tom, had to turn away their faces to hide their amusement.
Nevertheless, Dick sobered his face almost instantly as he answered:

"Well, these pranks around the farm have got to stop. You'll have your
grandfather and Uncle Randolph and Aunt Martha all upset, not to say
anything about your sisters and your mothers. It's a fortunate thing
that they went down to the town to do some shopping. Otherwise I think
all of you would be in for quite some punishment."

"Oh! Then you're not going to punish us, are you?" broke in Randy Rover
quickly. "That's fine! I knew you wouldn't mind our having a little
fun."

"Don't be so fast, young man," returned his father. "Your Uncle Dick
may be too lenient. I am rather of the opinion that you and your
brother, if not your cousins, have got to be taken in hand."

"Oh, please, Massa Tom, don' go fo' to punish 'em," burst out old Aleck
Pop. "I--I don't s'pose dey meant any great ha'm, even do dey did t'row
dat stream of wattah right in dis yere coon's mouf;" and he smiled
broadly, showing a row of ivories, rather the worse for wear.

"I think all of you boys had better go into the house and get some dry
clothing on before your mothers put in an appearance," suggested Dick
Rover. "If they see you like this, all dripping wet, they'll certainly
be worried."

"All right, Dad; I'll do it," answered Jack, quickly. And then he
motioned to his cousins. "Come on, let's see how fast we can make the
change;" and off into the big farmhouse rushed the boys, clattering up
the back stairs one after the other, to the two big rooms which they
occupied.

"Some boys!" was Sam Rover's comment, as he shook his head doubtfully.

"They are certainly growing older--and wilder," returned Dick Rover.

"We've got to take them in hand--that is dead certain!" said Tom Rover,
with conviction. "Why! if I don't do something with Andy and Randy
pretty soon, they'll be as--as----"

"As bad as you were, Tom, at their age," finished Dick Rover, with a
smile.

"Now you've said something, Dick," affirmed Sam Rover. "Andy isn't
quite so bad when it comes to playing tricks, although he certainly
says some awfully funny things, but when it comes to doing things Randy
continually puts me in mind of Tom."

"Oh, say! To hear you fellows talk, you'd think that I was the worst
boy that ever lived," grumbled Tom Rover. "What did I ever do to raise
such a rumpus as this?"

"Phew! What did he ever do to raise such a rumpus as this?" mocked Sam
Rover. "Well, what didn't he do? When father went to Africa and
disappeared and we came down here to good old Valley Brook Farm, wasn't
he the constant torment of Uncle Randolph and Aunt Martha, and the
hired girl, and all the rest of the community until, in sheer despair,
uncle had to send us off to Putnam Hall? And when we went to the Hall,
who was the first one to get into trouble--exploding a giant firecracker
on the campus? Answer me that, will you?"

"Ancient history," murmured Tom Rover, dryly. But then, of a sudden his
eyes began to twinkle. "No use talking, though, we certainly did have
some good times in those days, didn't we?" he continued. "Do you
remember how we got the best of old Josiah Crabtree?"

"Yes. And how we got the best of a whole lot of our enemies," added Sam
Rover.

"Yes, and what gloriously good times we did have at Putnam Hall and at
Brill College," came from Dick Rover, with a sigh. "Sometimes I wish
all those happy days could be lived over again."

"When you think of those days, Dick, just think of what great times are
in store for our boys," said Sam. "I only trust they have as good times
as we had."

"I guess they'll know how to take care of themselves all right enough,"
was Tom Rover's comment. "But, just the same, we can't permit them to
become too wild. Sending them to that private school in New York City
doesn't seem to have done them so very much good, although, of course,
I admit they are well educated for their age."

"I know where I'm going to send Jack when the proper time comes,"
answered Dick Rover.

"Where?" came from his brothers.

"I'm going to send him to Colby Hall, the military academy which our
old school chum, Larry Colby, has opened. Larry sent me some of his
literature some time ago; and I have heard from several people that
it's already a first-class institution of learning--every bit as good
as Putnam Hall."

"Well, if it's half as good as dear old Putnam Hall it must be some
school," said Tom Rover. "And there's no reason why Larry Colby
shouldn't be able to run a first-class military academy. He was a good
scholar and a first-class cadet when he was at Putnam Hall."

"After Larry left Putnam Hall he went to travel in Europe," continued
Dick. "Then he went through college, and immediately after that he
joined the militia of New York State and there worked his way up until
he now sports the title of colonel."

"Colonel Colby, eh? That's going some," was Tom's comment.

"His school is patterned after West Point, as was Putnam Hall, and I
understand he has a West Point officer there to instruct the cadets in
military tactics."

"Well, that's the sort of school our boys will need," answered Tom
Rover. "The stricter it is the better it will be for them."

"I think it would be a good scheme to send them to Larry Colby's
school," was Sam's comment. "As Larry knows us so well he would
probably take an especial interest in our boys."

"Yes. But I wouldn't want him to show our lads any special favors,"
broke in Tom, quickly. "If the boys went there, I should want them to
stand on their own feet, just as we did when we went to Putnam Hall."

"That's the talk, Tom! No favoritism!" cried Dick. "The only way to
make a boy thoroughly self-reliant is to make him take his own part."

"If we are going to send them off to boarding school, they might as
well go this Fall as any other time," remarked Sam Rover. "Have you any
idea when the term at Colby Hall begins, Dick?"

"About the middle of September."

"It's the middle of August now. That would give us a full month in
which to make arrangements and for them in which to get ready."

"Have you ever said anything to the twins about going to boarding
school, Tom?" questioned Sam.

"Oh, yes. They understand that they are to go to some place sooner or
later. Fred understands it, too, doesn't he?"

"Yes."

"And I told Jack only a short while ago that he must get ready to think
of leaving home," put in Dick Rover. "Of course, it will be rather hard
on the boys at first. They have never been away from us at all except
the two weeks when they were out in that boys' camp."

"They'll have to get used to it, just as we got used to it when father
went off to Africa and Uncle Randy sent us to Putnam Hall. Perhaps we
had better tell them----"

Sam Rover broke off short as a series of shrieks in a high-pitched
feminine voice issued from the pantry of the big farmhouse. An instant
later a hired girl, followed by a middle-aged cook, came flying forth
from the kitchen doorway.

"Oh, save me! Save me!" cried the hired girl, clutching her skirts
tightly around her ankles, "Save me!"

"Oh, Mr. Rover! Mr. Rover! It's those dreadful boys! I won't stay here
another minute!" screamed the cook, flourishing a big spoon in one hand
and a dish-cloth in the other. "It's outrageous! That's what it is! I'm
going to pack my trunk and leave this house right away!"

"What's the matter?" demanded Tom Rover, quickly.

"Are you hurt?" came anxiously from Dick.

"What have the boys done now?" questioned Sam.

"What have they done?" wailed the hired girl. "I just went into the
pantry and opened the closet door and out jumped about a thousand mice
at me!"

"Yes! and they are running all over the house!" broke in the cook
savagely. "One of 'em ran right over my foot and tried to bite me! I'm
going to pack my trunk and leave! I won't stay here another minute!"




CHAPTER II

SOMETHING OF THE PAST


At the announcement of the hired girl that their sons had let loose in
the farmhouse a thousand mice--more or less--the three Rover brothers
looked at each other enquiringly.

"Another joke--and so soon!" gasped Sam Rover.

"That certainly is the limit!" broke out Dick Rover, as he started for
the house.

"If I find Andy and Randy have been up to another trick right on top of
this water-hose nonsense, I'll give them a tanning they won't forget in
a hurry," added Tom Rover; and then he and Sam followed Dick up the
back porch and into the kitchen.

To the readers of the former volumes in these two "Rover Boys Series,"
Dick, Tom and Sam Rover will need no special introduction. For the
benefit of others, however, let me state that the sober-minded and
determined Dick was the oldest of the three, with the fun-loving Tom
coming next and sturdy Sam being the youngest. They were the sons of
one Anderson Rover, who, when not traveling, made his home at Valley
Brook Farm, in New York State, living there with his brother Randolph
Rover and wife Martha.

While Dick, Tom, and Sam were quite young, and while their father was
off exploring in the interior of Africa, the three Rovers had been sent
to Putnam Hall Military Academy, where they had made a few enemies and
likewise a host of friends, including a manly and straight-forward
cadet named Lawrence Colby. After many adventures both at school and in
various portions of the globe, they had graduated from Putnam Hall with
honor and then entered Brill College.

At that time, Mr. Anderson Rover, who had long since returned from
Africa, was not in the best of health. He had numerous business
interests both in Wall Street, New York City, and in the West to take
care of, and presently it was found necessary that Dick leave college
and take charge of business matters for his parent. In this task Dick
was soon aided by Tom, leaving Sam the only member of the family to
graduate from Brill.

While at Putnam Hall the three Rovers had become acquainted with three
charming girls, Dora Stanhope and her cousins, Nellie and Grace Laning.
This acquaintance had ripened into loving intimacy; and when Dick went
into business he took Dora Stanhope for his life-long partner. A little
later Tom was married to Nellie Laning, and, after he had left Brill
and joined his brothers in conducting their father's various business
enterprises, Sam married Grace Laning.

With the aid of Mr. Anderson Rover and some others, The Rover Company
was organized with offices on Wall Street, New York City. The company
dealt in stocks, bonds, real estate, and other investments; and Dick
was now president, with Tom secretary and Sam treasurer. The company
had been prosperous from the start, although on several occasions
enemies had done their best to give the concern a black eye.

When they were first married, Dick and his beautiful wife Dora had
begun housekeeping in a cosy apartment in the metropolis, and they had
presently been followed by Tom and Sam. But two years later the three
brothers had a chance to buy a beautiful plot of ground on Riverside
Drive facing the noble Hudson River, and on this they built three fine
houses adjoining each other, Dick living in the middle house with Tom
on one side and Sam on the other.

Before the happy young folks moved into the new homes, Dick and Dora
were blessed with a little son, who later on was named John, after Mr.
John Laning. Later still, this couple had a daughter, whom they named
Martha, after Aunt Martha of Valley Brook Farm. Little Jack, as he was
called in those days, was a wonderfully bright and clever lad with many
of the clear-minded qualities which had made his father so successful
in life.

About the time young Jack was presented with a baby sister, Tom and
Nellie Rover came forward with twin boys, one of whom was named
Anderson, after his grandfather, and the other Randolph, after his
uncle. Andy and Randy, as they were always called for short, were
exceedingly bright, each taking after his father, Andy always saying
things that were more or less funny and Randy playing tricks whenever
he got the chance. They were truly chips off the old block, and Tom
knew it, although outwardly he professed to be ignorant of the fact.

"Those twins will be some boys when they grow up," was old Anderson
Rover's comment, when the lads were less than five years old. "They're
just as full of fun now as Tom ever dared to be."

"So they are," answered his brother Randolph. "My! my! what will they
ever do with them when they get a little older?"

"I sha'n't mind," said Aunt Martha, her eyes beaming brightly. "That
is, if they are really and truly as good-hearted as Tom has always
been. He certainly was the worst of the lot when it came to playing
jokes, but no lad ever had a better heart than Tom--not one!"

About the time that Tom began to boast about his twins, Sam and Grace
came along with a beautiful little girl, whom they named Mary, after
Mrs. Laning. About a year later the girl was followed by a boy, and
this sturdy little chap was named Fred, after Sam's old school chum,
Fred Garrison.

Living so close together, the four boys and the two girls were brought
up almost like one big family. The girls were all but inseparable, and
the boys could generally be found together, either studying, playing,
or having a good time.

When the time came to set the children to studying, Martha and Mary
were placed in a private school for girls located but a short distance
from their homes. It was thought best, however, at the start to send
the boys to a public school, and this was done. For three years matters
went along very well, and during that time The Rover Company prospered
far beyond the expectations of those in charge. But then Andy and
Randy, becoming a little older, began to exhibit their talent for
playing tricks, and usually they were seconded in these efforts by Jack
and Fred. Once or twice all of the boys were reported by the school
principal for this, and each time the lads were remonstrated with by
their fathers in such a manner that, as young Andy expressed it, "it
was far more comfortable to sit down standing up than it was any other
way."

"I think I'll have to do something with those twins," said Tom Rover to
his wife, after the boys had been reported for more tricks. "The school
they go to doesn't seem to be strict enough." And thereupon he had sent
the boys to a private establishment further uptown.

Jack and Fred had begged their parents that they might be allowed to do
likewise; and at this private school the four cousins had been kept
until the close of the Spring term the preceding June. To the credit of
this school it must be said that the boys advanced rapidly in their
studies. Their deportment, however, was apparently no better than it
had been before, and as a consequence Tom Rover was more worried than
ever, while Dick and Sam began to wonder secretly whether it would not
be advisable to separate their sons from the mischievous twins.

One day Dick broached this subject to his offspring. At once young Jack
set up a wild remonstrance.

"Oh, Dad! don't take me away from Andy and Randy and Fred!" he pleaded.
"Why, we are just like brothers! I wouldn't know how to get along
without 'em."

"But I'm afraid Andy and Randy are leading you into bad habits,"
returned Dick Rover.

"I don't think so, Dad. Anyway, I've heard folks say that Andy and
Randy are no worse than their father used to be--and you never wanted
to be separated from Uncle Tom, did you?"

At this question Dick Rover's face took on a sudden sober look. "No; I
never wanted to be separated from your uncle, that's true," he said.
"But I tell you what we did used to do. When his pranks got too wild I
and your Uncle Sam used to hold him in."

"All right then, Dad. I'll tell Fred about this, and we'll see what we
can do towards holding in Andy and Randy;" and there, after some more
talk along the same line, the matter was allowed to rest.

Young Jack was as good as his word, and during the remainder of that
Spring term at the private school in New York City, Andy and Randy were
as well behaved as could possibly be expected from two red-blooded
lads.

It had been planned by the Rovers that the Summer should be spent by
all the young folks and their mothers at Valley Brook Farm, the fathers
to come down from time to time, and especially over the week ends.
Since Dick, Tom, and Sam had become married the farm had been enlarged
by the purchase of two hundred additional acres. The farmhouse, too,
had been made larger, with the old portion remodeled, and a water
system from the rapidly-growing town of Dexter's Corners, as well as
electric lighting, had been installed. A telephone had been put in some
years previous.

At first after their arrival at their grandfather's home, the four boys
had been content to take it easy, spending their time roaming the
fields, helping to gather the fruit, of which there was great
abundance, and in going fishing and swimming. But then Andy and Randy
had found time growing a little heavy on their hands, and one prank had
been followed by another. Some of the tricks had been played on Jack
and Fred, and they, of course, had done their best to retaliate, and
this had, on more than one occasion, brought forth a forceful, but
good-natured, pitched battle, and the fathers and the others present
had had all they could do to hold the boys in check.

"I never saw such boys," was Mary Rover's comment to her brother Fred.
"Why can't you behave yourselves just as Martha and I do?"

"Oh, girls never have any good times," answered Fred. "They just sit
around and primp up and read, and do things like that."

"Indeed!" and Mary tossed her curly head. "I think we have just as good
times as you boys, every bit; but we don't have to be rough about it;"
and then she ran off to play a game of lawn tennis with her cousin
Martha.

The time was the middle of August, and as the summer was proving to be
an unusually warm one, all the older Rovers were glad enough to take it
easy on the farm, they having earlier in the season been down to the
seashore for a couple of weeks. Dick, Tom and Sam had each taken a week
off at various times, and all managed to get down to the farm early
every Saturday afternoon, to remain until Sunday night or Monday
morning.

And it was late on a Saturday afternoon, when the ladies and the girls
had gone to Dexter's Corners to do some shopping, and while the fathers
were busy reading and writing, that the events occurred with which the
present story opens.

As Dick Rover ran into the farmhouse he heard a slight scream coming
from the sitting-room. The scream was followed by exclamations from two
men, and then a wild thumping as if someone was hitting the floor with
a cane.

"It's a mouse--several of 'em!" came in the voice of Grandfather Rover.

"Oh, my! oh, my! wherever did they come from?" exclaimed old Aunt
Martha.

"Never mind where they came from, I'll fix 'em," asserted old Randolph
Rover, and then followed another thumping as he rushed around between
the chairs and behind the sofa, trying to slaughter some of the
scampering mice with his heavy walking stick.

"Where are they? Where are those mice?" demanded Tom Rover, giving a
hasty glance around the kitchen.

"There is one--under the sink!" ejaculated his brother Sam, and
catching up a stove lifter he let fly with such accurate aim that the
unhappy rodent was despatched on the spot.

"I see another one back of the pantry door," said Tom Rover a moment
later, and then made a dive into the pantry. Here, in a side closet,
the door of which was partly open, he saw a broom and grabbed it
quickly. Then he made a wild pass at the mouse, but the rodent eluded
him and scrambled over the kitchen floor and into the sitting-room.

"Oh, dear! Oh, dear! Did you ever see so many mice?" came in a wailing
voice from Aunt Martha. She had clambered up on a chair and stood there
holding her dress tightly around her feet.

"It's another of those boys' tricks, that's what it is," asserted
Grandfather Rover. "They ought to be punished for it."

"Yes. But we've got to get rid of these mice first," answered his
brother.

Then Randolph Rover, seeing a mouse scampering across the side of the
room, threw his walking stick at it with all his force. But his aim was
poor and the walking stick, striking the edge of the table, glanced off
and hit a fish-globe, smashing it to pieces and sending the water and
the goldfish flying in every direction.




CHAPTER III

WHAT FOLLOWED ANOTHER TRICK


When the hubbub downstairs started the four Rover boys were up in their
adjoining bedrooms partly undressed and in the midst of a couple of
impromptu boxing matches, one taking place between Andy and Jack and
the other between Randy and Fred.

"There, my boy, how do you like that?" cried Andy, as, dancing around,
he managed to land a slapping blow on Jack's bare shoulder.

"Fine, child! fine!" retorted young Jack. "But not half as good as
this," he continued, and, with a sudden spring, he landed one blow on
Andy's chest and another on his shoulder which sent Tom's son
staggering half-way across the bed.

"Hurrah! one man down! Now for the next!" cried Fred, and managed to
land several blows in quick succession on Randy's shoulder.

But then the fun-loving twin came at him with a rush, sending him into
a corner and on to a little table containing a number of books. As Fred
went down the table did likewise and the books fell all over him.

"Whoop!" roared Randy in his delight. "Down and buried!"

"But not dead," retorted Fred, promptly, and catching up several of the
books he hurled them in quick succession at his opponent. One in
particular caught Randy in the stomach, and down he sat with a
suddenness that jarred the floor.

"Say!" exclaimed Jack, suddenly, and held up his hand, "this won't do
at all. The folks downstairs will think we're pulling the house down
over their ears. We'll have to slow up a bit. You know what our fathers
said a little while ago."

"All right," returned Andy, promptly, as he arose to his feet. "After
this we'll be as quiet as a thunder storm in a moving picture drama."

"That's the talk! Silence it is!" cried his twin; and then to let off a
little extra steam he silently turned a cart-wheel across the floor,
after which he proceeded with his toilet making.

The boys were still minus their collars and ties when they suddenly
realized that something unusual was taking place downstairs. They had
closed the bedroom doors, but now all of them rushed out into the
hallway.

"Great watermelons!" groaned Randy, and turned slightly pale. "I forgot
all about 'em!"

"About what?" chimed in Jack.

"You don't mean the mice?" demanded Andy.

"Yes, I do!"

"What mice?" questioned Fred.

"The mice I caught under the flooring of the old wagon house
yesterday," answered Randy.

"I thought you put them in a cage and drowned them in the brook."

"I was going to do that, but then I changed my mind and put 'em in a
couple of boxes. I thought maybe I might have a chance to train
'em--just like those mice we once saw in a show."

"Where did you put those boxes?" demanded Andy, quickly.

"I--I--didn't know exactly what to do with 'em, so--I--I--put 'em on
the shelf in the pantry downstairs," faltered the twin.

"Great catfish, Randy! you've got us into a fine mess!" broke in Fred.

"Coming right on top of that trouble with the water-hose!" added Jack,
ruefully.

After that there was a moment of silence, the four cousins gazing at
each other uncertainly. Then Randy drew a long breath.

"Well, I'm going downstairs to see what's doing," he declared. "If I've
got to suffer for this, I might as well see the fun."

"I'm going down, too," responded his twin, and side by side they ran
down the stairs, with Jack and Fred close at their heels.

Perhaps it was poetic justice that Randy, who had been the cause of
this commotion, should suffer the worst for it. Hardly had he put his
foot in the lower hallway of the farmhouse when a mouse, scampering
from a nearby doorway, made directly for him. The boy made a wild jump
to step on the rodent, missed his footing, and came down flat on his
back. He landed directly at the foot of the stairs, and his brother,
being unable to stop, fell on top of him.

"Hi! Get off of me!" gasped the unfortunate youth. "What do you want to
do--crack my head open?"

"Next time you go down, give a fellow warning," retorted his brother,
scrambling to his feet; and then the two boys, with Jack and Fred,
entered the sitting-room, doing this just as their fathers came in from
the direction of the kitchen and just when old Uncle Randolph made his
unfortunate attack on the fish-globe.

"Hello! look at the fish on the floor," exclaimed Jack. "What's the
matter, Grandfather? Did the mice upset the globe?"

"No. I did that, trying to hit one of the pesky creatures," explained
old Uncle Randolph. "We must kill them some way or they'll get all over
the house, and then none of us will have any peace."

"I wouldn't care for a piece of mouse, anyway," remarked Andy, but in
such a low tone that none of the older folks heard him.

"Everybody get a stick and go at those mice," commanded Dick Rover, and
looked at the boys so sternly they all began to feel uncomfortable.
"We've got either to kill them or drive them out of the house,
otherwise the lady folks won't be able to sleep to-night."

"I'll get a poker and kill as many of 'em as I can," cried Randy, and
ran out into the kitchen to do as he had mentioned.

The other boys, as well as their fathers, armed themselves with canes,
umbrellas, and brooms, and for the next fifteen minutes there was a
rapid and thorough search for all of the rodents. Several were driven
outside through the open doors, while others were caught and
slaughtered in various parts of the kitchen, the pantry, and the rooms
adjoining. Then the goldfish were gathered up and put into another bowl
of water and the bits of broken glass were removed.

"I'm awfully sorry, Uncle Randy, you broke the fish-globe," said Randy,
contritely, "but I'm glad you saved the fish."

"Look here, young man, I want to talk to you--and to you, too!" cried
Tom, sharply, and without more ado caught each twin by the arm and
marched them into the library.

"Wow! I'm afraid Andy and Randy are in for it now," whispered Fred to
Jack.

"Well, Randy certainly had no right to put those mice in the pantry,"
answered his cousin. "Just the same, I hope Uncle Tom isn't too severe
with 'em."

"I don't see why Andy should be punished for this."

"Oh, they always stick together. You know that as well as I do."

"So I do. Isn't it wonderful how each is willing to share the blame
with the other?" added Fred, with deep admiration.

Once in the library, Tom Rover shut the doors tightly and then faced
his twin sons.

"Now then, I want the truth about this," he commenced sternly. "Where
did those mice come from?"

"They came from under the flooring of the old wagon house," answered
Randy. "I caught them there when the carpenters tore up the floor to
put down the new one."

"And where did you put them?"

"I put 'em in a--er--a couple of boxes."

"Randy was going to keep the mice and try to teach 'em to do tricks,
just the same as those mice we once saw in a vaudeville show," put in
Andy, quickly, to do what he could to shield his brother.

"More tricks, eh?" was Tom's dry comment. "It seems to me that it is
nothing but tricks lately. I suppose you placed the boxes in the pantry
just so the mice wouldn't catch cold, didn't you?" he went on
quizzically.

"No, sir. I--I--placed 'em there just for safekeeping," was the
hesitating answer. "I didn't know that Lulu would disturb them."

"That's it, Dad. I'm sure Randy didn't want 'em disturbed."

"And what did you have to do with this, Andy?" demanded the father.

At this the boy addressed had nothing to say.

"He had nothing to do with it, Dad," answered Randy. "I got the mice
and put 'em in the two boxes. I s'pose it wasn't just the right thing
to put 'em in the pantry, but I give you my word I didn't think they'd
be upset the way they were and be sent running all over the house. If
Lulu hadn't touched the boxes, the mice would be there yet."

"Perhaps," answered Tom Rover, dryly. "Just the same, I think you
placed the boxes there hoping that Lulu or the cook would have
curiosity enough to see what they contained. As it is, your actions
have upset the whole house, brought on the destruction of the
fish-globe, and the cook is so upset that she has threatened to leave."

"Oh, she won't leave, Dad. She likes her big wages too well," remarked
Andy, quickly.

"I don't know about that, Son. Nobody is going to stand for your tricks
much longer. They are getting altogether too numerous." Tom continued
to look as stern as possible. "I've got to take both of you in hand,
and that is all there is to it. You are growing wilder every day.
Something has got to be done. Now you go right upstairs and finish
dressing, and don't dare to let me hear of any more tricks being played
for the rest of this day, otherwise I'll not only give you a sound
thrashing, but I'll cut off your spending money and do several other
things that you won't like;" and, thus speaking, the father of the
twins opened the door to the hall and shoved them both out towards the
stairs with more force than they had felt for some time. The two lads
lost no time in retiring to their bedroom.

"Say, Randy, I think you got off rather easily," remarked Andy, when
they were alone.

"I think so myself," was the quick response. "I thought Dad would be so
mad that he would give me one everlasting licking."

"Say! how did you make out?" questioned Fred, eagerly, as he came
sneaking in, followed by Jack.

"You don't look as if you had suffered very much," was Jack's comment.
"I thought you'd come out looking as if you'd been through a threshing
machine."

What Randy and Andy had to tell was quickly related. At the conclusion,
Jack, who being somewhat older than any of the others, was looked upon
as something of a leader, shook his head thoughtfully.

"I guess we had better pull in our horns a little, for a while at
least," was his conclusion. "My father was mighty mad, too, and so was
Fred's. If we don't look out, we'll all get in wrong. They didn't like
that wetting business to start with."

While the boys were finishing their toilet and discussing the matter,
their fathers were doing what they could to set matters to rights
downstairs, and to pacify their Aunt Martha and also the cook and the
hired girl. The cook was particularly wrought up.

"It ain't the first time nor the second time nor the third time that
them boys have played tricks on us," she declared. "It's been nothin'
but one thing or 'nother ever since they came here--and last Summer it
was the same way. The first thing you know, they'll be doin' somethin'
awful, and some of us'll get hurt. I think I had better leave."

"If she leaves, I'll leave too," declared the hired girl.

"Don't think of leaving," said Tom Rover. "I'll take those boys in hand
and see to it that they don't bother you any more. If they do the least
thing, I'll pack them back to our house in New York." And after a
little more talk he succeeded in mollifying the cook and the hired girl
to such an extent that they went back to their work. Then the fathers
of the boys withdrew once more to the library.

"I don't know how you feel about it," began Tom, after he had picked up
his comic paper once more and then thrown it aside in disgust. "I begin
to think that the best thing I can do is to pack those twins off to
Colby Hall."

"I don't know but what I agree with you, Tom," answered Sam. "And if
you do send them, I think Fred might as well go along."

"Yes; and Jack also," added Dick. "Those boys will never want to be
separated, and I don't know that we could do better than to place them
under Larry Colby's care, especially if we let Larry know just how wild
they are apt to be and tell him to take them in hand."

"Yes; I'd want Larry to know all about them," answered Tom. "And I'd
want him to give me his word that he'd keep a sharp eye on Andy and
Randy and punish them severely every time they broke any of the rules.
It's the only way to bring them up properly."

"All right then, Tom. If you think that way and Dick thinks the same,
let's get right down to business and send a letter to Larry Colby
to-night," said Sam.

"But what of the boys' mothers?" questioned Dick Rover. He knew that
his wife Dora would grieve considerably over having young Jack leave
home.

"We'll have to explain the situation to them and get them to agree,"
answered Tom, firmly.




CHAPTER IV

JACK IN WALL STREET


"Just to think, Jack! a week from to-day we'll be on our way to Colby
Hall Military Academy."

"Yes, Fred. Doesn't it seem wonderful? I do hope we'll find the school
to our liking," returned Jack, with a serious look on his face. "It
would be too bad to go to some punk school."

"Oh, you can be sure that the school is all right; otherwise our
fathers wouldn't have picked it out for us," broke in Andy. "They know
what a good military academy is. Didn't they go to that famous old
Putnam Hall?"

"I wish we could have gone to Putnam Hall," added Randy. "From what dad
has told me, it must have been one dandy school."

"Well, we can't go to something that ain't," answered his twin with a
grin. "Putnam Hall doesn't exist any more. When it burnt to the ground,
Captain Putnam felt too old to have it rebuilt, and so he settled with
the insurance companies and retired."

"Gee! but won't we have dandy times if that school is what we hope
for?" cried Andy. "We'll make things hum, won't we?"

"Right you are!" came in a chorus from the others. And then, in sudden
high spirits, the boys began to wrestle with each other, ending up with
something of a pillow fight in which not only pillows but also bolsters
and numerous other articles were used as missiles.

After a never-to-be-forgotten vacation at Valley Brook Farm, the boys,
along with their sisters and their parents, had returned to their homes
in New York City. The Summer was almost at an end, and schools all over
were opening for the Fall and Winter term.

It had been no easy task for Dick, Tom, and Sam Rover to convince their
wives that it would be best to send the boys to some strict boarding
school instead of to the private school which they had been attending
in the metropolis. Gentle Dora Rover had cried a little at the thought
of having her only son Jack leave home, and Grace Rover had been
affected the same way at the thought of parting from her only boy Fred.

"But both of you will be better off than I shall be," had been Nellie
Rover's comment. "Each of you will have a daughter still at home, while
both of my twins will be gone and I'll have nobody;" and her eyes, too,
had filled with tears.

But with it all, the mothers were sensible women, and they agreed with
their husbands that the boys needed to be placed under strict
discipline and that this was not possible at the school which they had
been attending.

"That school is altogether too fashionable," had been Dick Rover's
comment. "They make regular dudes of the pupils and they think more of
high collars and neckties and patent-leather shoes than they do of
reading, writing and arithmetic. Now, I want Jack to get a good
education and I want him to learn how to behave himself while he is
getting it." And so, after several communications had passed between
the Rovers and Colonel Lawrence Colby, it was settled that the boys
should be enlisted as cadets at Colby Hall.

"Cease firing!" cried Jack, when there came a lull in the pillow fight.
"The first thing you know somebody will come in here and we'll be in
hot water again." The boys were up in Jack's bedroom, and all of their
mothers were downstairs, talking over the question of the wardrobes the
lads were to take along to school.

"All right, Commodore," answered Andy, gaily. "Out of the trenches,
boys; the war is over!"

"Suits me," panted Randy, who was all out of wind from his exertions.
"Melt the cannons into telephones and send messages to the girls that
the soldier boys are coming home," and at this remark there was a short
laugh. Then all the boys proceeded to make themselves comfortable in
various attitudes around the bedroom.

"Say! I'm glad of one thing," remarked Fred; "and that is, we won't be
utter strangers at Colby Hall. Spouter Powell will be there and so will
Gif Garrison."

It may be as well to explain here that Spouter Powell, whose real first
name was Richard, was the son of the Rovers' old friend, John Powell,
commonly called Songbird. Richard Powell did not seem to have much of
his father's ability to write verse, but he did have a great fondness
for making speeches, whence had come his nickname of Spouter.

Gifford Garrison, always called Gif for short, was the son of the
Rovers' old schoolmate, Fred Garrison, after whom Fred Rover had been
named. Gif was a big, strong youth who doted on athletic sports of all
kinds. Both Gif and Spouter had visited the Rover boys on a number of
occasions, and consequently all of the lads were well acquainted.

"Yes, I'll be glad to meet Gif and Spouter," returned Jack. "I like
them both, even though Spouter gets pretty talky sometimes."

Just then there sounded downstairs a postman's whistle, and a minute
later Martha Rover came upstairs.

"Here's a letter for you, Jack," said his sister, holding it out.

"Thanks," he returned, as he took the communication and glanced at it.
"Why! what do you know about this? Here we were just talking about Gif
and Spouter, and here is a letter from Gif now," he cried.

"Wonder what he's got to say," remarked Fred, and then, as he saw his
cousin lingering at the doorway, he added: "Don't you want to come in,
Martha, and join us?"

"No, thank you," she returned. "I'm going out with Mary. We're going to
buy some things for you boys to take along when you go to that boarding
school."

"Oh, I know what those will be," burst out Andy, gaily. "Pink neckties
with yellow dots, or nice red socks with blue rings around 'em."

"Oh, the idea!" burst out the girl. "What an eye for color you have!"

"Well, maybe it was blue socks with red rings around 'em," went on
Andy, innocently; "and maybe the pink neckties will be plain yellow."

"Oh, Cousin Andy! I think you're just the worst ever!" shrieked Martha,
and then ran downstairs to join those below.

In the meantime, Jack had torn open the letter and was scanning it
hastily.

"Don't be selfish!" burst out Fred, curiously. "If Gif has anything to
say about that school, let us hear it."

"Sure. I'll read it out loud," answered his cousin.

The communication, which was a rather long one, was of the usual boyish
type, and much of it was of no particular interest. Several paragraphs,
however, may be quoted here.

                     *      *      *      *      *

"You will be interested to know that besides Spouter Powell there will
be another boy here who may or may not join our set. The fellow's name
is Walter Baxter, and he is the son of Dan Baxter, the man who, years
ago, caused your father and your uncles so much trouble at Putnam Hall
and other places. Baxter is very hot-tempered and willing to fight
almost any time.

"When I get back to school I am going in for athletics, particularly
football this Fall, and I hope some of you fellows will want to go into
athletics, too, for it will make it more interesting to have some
friends on the eleven. Spouter don't go in for that sort of thing. He
likes to save his wind for talk."

                     *      *      *      *      *

"Hum! that's rather interesting," was Randy's comment. "I wonder if
this Walt Baxter will try to make trouble for us like his father did
for our fathers?"

"Well, if he does, I guess we can take care of him, just as our folks
took care of his father," returned his twin.

"No use borrowing trouble," came from Fred. "I've heard from my dad
that Mr. Dan Baxter has reformed and is now a first-class business man
and is quite prosperous. It may be that while his son Walt is somewhat
hot-tempered, he may still be a thoroughly good fellow. I wouldn't give
a rap for a boy that didn't show some spirit once in a while."

On the following morning Jack was on the point of going over to Fred's
house to return some books he had borrowed, when his father called to
him.

"I want you to go down to our offices with me this morning, Jack," said
Dick Rover. "I've got a package there that I meant to bring up for your
mother. You can come right back with it."

"All right, Dad. I'll be with you in a minute," answered the son, and
ran off to deliver the books and to let Fred, as well as Randy and
Andy, know where he was going.

Jack's temperament was a good deal like that of his father, and, young
as he was, he already took an interest in what was being done in the
offices of The Rover Company. On more than one occasion he had begged
his parent's permission to visit the place on Wall Street, and once had
been granted a "look-in" at the Stock Exchange during one of its
busiest sessions. That sight was one he had never forgotten.

When the Rovers had first opened up in Wall Street, they had taken
possession of a set of rather shabby offices formerly occupied by
another firm with which they had had various difficulties, the
particulars of which were related in "The Rover Boys in New York" and
"The Rover Boys in Business." Now, however, they occupied the entire
fourth floor of another building in a much better location. There was a
large general office and a counting room, and a private office for each
of the three brothers. Their office help numbered about twenty; and
when business was brisk, the place consequently was a decidedly busy
one.

When the offices of The Rover Company were reached, Dick Rover brought
out the package intended for his wife. It was quite a bundle, and not
wrapped as well as it might have been.

"You'd better let the office boy put an extra string around that,
Jack," said the father.

"Oh, that's all right, Dad. I can get it home just as it is. There
won't be much of a crowd on the subway train going uptown this time of
day."

Jack spent a few minutes in the offices, speaking to the office boy and
to several of the clerks with whom he was acquainted, and then started
off for home, the bundle under his arm. He came down by one of the
several elevators to the lower corridor of the building, and there
stood in the wide-open doorway, contemplating the bustle in the narrow
street beyond. Wall Street is the financial heart of our nation, and
the activity there during business hours is something tremendous.

As Jack stood with his bundle under his arm, his attention was suddenly
attracted to what was going on close by, beyond several columns which
formed a part of the entrance to the building. In a niche of the wall
stood a peddler, a short, sallow-faced and hollow-eyed man, evidently
of foreign birth, trying to sell some cheap wares displayed on a little
three-legged stand which he had set up. In front of the peddler stood a
tall, slim, overbearing boy, loudly dressed and wearing light-colored
spats and gloves to match.

"You've got no right to plank yourself here!" cried the overbearing boy
savagely. "You get out of here or I'll dump that trash of yours into
the street."

"Please, Mister, I am a poor man," pleaded the peddler in very broken
English. "Please, Mister, you buy somet'in'?"

"You get out, I tell you!" went on the tall youth with a very lordly
air. "Get out, I tell you! You foreigners are all thieves! Get out of
here!" And without further warning he caught the thin, little peddler
by the shoulder and gave him such a shove that the man had all he could
do to keep from falling and from upsetting his little stock in trade.




CHAPTER V

GETTING READY TO LEAVE


"The mean fellow!"

Such was Jack's exclamation as he witnessed the scene between the
hollow-eyed little street peddler and the dudish, overbearing youth who
had attacked him.

"Get out, I tell you!" repeated the overbearing boy, as the peddler
straightened up and caught hold of his little stand to keep it from
tumbling over. "I've a big mind to kick your stuff into the street for
you."

"Let up there, you big boob!" cried Jack, and without stopping to think
twice he leaped towards the other youth and caught him firmly by the
arm.

The boy who had attacked the peddler had not expected such
interference, and he whirled around greatly surprised, especially when
he saw a boy smaller than himself confronting him.

"What--what do you mean by catching hold of me this way?" he stammered.

"Why can't you leave that poor peddler alone?" retorted Jack.

"What business is this of yours?"

"That chap wasn't doing any harm here so far as I can see. He's only
trying to earn his living."

"See here, kid! this is none of your affair, and I want you to keep out
of it," stormed the dudish-looking youth. "We don't allow those fellows
around this building."

"Then you tell him to move on in a decent kind of way," returned Jack.

"I'll do as I please." The big boy turned again towards the peddler and
made a motion as if to push both the man and his stand down, but,
instantly, Jack caught hold of him again and pulled him back, shoving
him in between two pillars of the building's entrance.

"You had better go on," said Jack to the peddler, and, evidently much
frightened by what was occurring, the little man took up his stand and
disappeared as if by magic in the crowd on the street.

"Say! you've got gall to interfere with me!" burst out the big youth,
glaring at Jack. "I'll teach you a lesson;" and with a sudden move he
pulled Jack's bundle from under his arm and threw it out into the
street. "Now you go about your business and don't you interfere with me
again."

To have the bundle belonging to his mother treated in that fashion made
the young Rover's blood boil. He jumped at the big youth, and as the
other aimed a blow at him he dodged and then caught his opponent by the
ear.

"Ouch! Let go!" screamed the big youth in sudden pain, and then he
landed a blow on Jack's shoulder and received a crack on the chin in
return.

How far this encounter might have gone, it is hard to say, but at that
moment, while a crowd was beginning to gather, there came a sudden
interruption in the appearance of Jack's Uncle Tom, followed by his
Uncle Sam.

"Hello! What does this mean?" demanded Tom Rover, as he stepped between
the two boys.

"It means that I've got an account to settle with that young snip, Mr.
Rover!" cried the big youth savagely and giving Jack a look full of
hatred.

"Uncle Tom, that fellow is nothing but a brute," declared Jack.

"A brute? What do you mean?"

"He just attacked a poor little peddler who was trying to sell a few
things from a stand here in the corner. He tried to knock the peddler
down and upset his stand. I told him to stop and then he attacked me."

"Humph! Are you this boy's uncle, Mr. Rover?" asked the big youth, in
surprise.

"I am, Martell."

"Then I want to tell you that he has no right to interfere with me,"
went on Napoleon Martell, uglily. "Those peddlers are always hanging
around here and my opinion is they are all thieves."

"That fellow was no more a thief than you are," broke in Jack,
sturdily.

"Ha! Do you mean to call me a thief?"

"Come, Jack, such talk won't do down here in Wall Street," remonstrated
his Uncle Sam, who had listened closely to what had been said. Sam
Rover, from a distance, had seen the bundle flung into the gutter and
had picked it up. Both the wrapping and the string were broken, but the
contents of the package seemed to be uninjured.

"If that kid is your nephew, you had better take him in hand," grumbled
Napoleon Martell, and then, not wishing to have any more words with the
two older Rovers, he broke through the crowd which had gathered and
hurried up the street.

"Come into the building," ordered Tom Rover to Jack, for the crowd was
getting denser every instant; boys and men who had been hurrying by
stopped to find out what was the matter.

"I guess I'll have to go back to get that bundle tied up again,"
answered Jack. The encounter had excited him not a little. "Uncle Tom,
that fellow seemed to know you?"

"Yes, I know that boy. His name is Napoleon Martell, although they call
him Nappy for short. He is the son of Nelson Martell, one of our rivals
in business, a man who occupies the floor above us in this building."

"I didn't know Nappy was much of a scrapper," was Sam Rover's comment.
"I thought he was too much of a dude to fight."

"He certainly is a dude as far as appearances go," answered Jack; "but
he has the manner of a brute. I wish now I'd had the chance to give him
a good licking," he went on heartily.

"You had better go slow when it comes to fighting," returned his uncle.
"A fight seldom settles anything."

"Didn't you ever have any fights, Uncle Sam?"

At this direct question Sam Rover's face became a study while his
brother Tom looked at him rather quizzically.

"Yes! I had my share of fights when I was a boy," admitted the uncle.
"But, looking back, I think a good many of them might have been
avoided. Of course, I expect a boy to take his own part and not be a
coward. But a fight isn't always the best way to settle a difficulty."

Once back in the offices, Jack did not hesitate to tell his father
about what had happened. In the meantime, an office boy rewrapped the
bundle, securing it this time with a stout cord.

"I am sorry to hear about this trouble, Jack," said his father
seriously. "I don't want you to grow up into a scrapper."

"But, Dad, I couldn't stand by and see that fellow abuse a poor little
peddler like that," answered the son. "It wasn't fair at all! What
right had that Nappy Martell to order the man away?"

"No right, that I know of. Jack, except that Mr. Martell owns some
stock in the company that owns this building; but that would be a very
far-fetched right at the best."

"I guess those Martells are all tarred from the same stick," was Tom
Rover's comment. "The father is just as overbearing as the son."

"Do you know what I'm inclined to think?" remarked Sam Rover, as he
walked over and closed the door to the outer office so that the clerks
might not hear what was said. "I'm inclined to think that Nelson
Martell is a good deal of a crook."

"And that's just my idea of the man, too," added Tom Rover. "What do
you think, Dick?"

At this direct question the oldest of the three brothers pursed up his
lips in concentrated thought.

"To tell the truth, I don't know exactly what to think," he answered
slowly. "Some of the things that Nelson Martell is trying to put
through are certainly rather shady. Still, they may be within the
strict letter of the law, and if that is so it would hardly be fair to
call the man a crook."

When Jack returned home, he, of course, told his cousins of his
encounter at the entrance to the office building.

"It's a pity you didn't have a chance to give Martell one in the eye or
in the nose," was Randy's comment. "Such a brute deserves to be hauled
down a peg or two."

"Well, I rather think I gave his ear a pretty good twist," answered
Jack, grinning.

"You ought to have made him pick up that bundle he flung into the
gutter," added Fred.

"I couldn't do much of anything with the crowd gathering around. My!
how the people do flock together when the least thing happens! If we
had stayed there another minute or two, we might have had a thousand
people around us."

With so many things to be thought of and done previous to the departure
for Colby Hall, the subject of Nappy Martell was soon dismissed. All
the boys were wondering what they had better put in their trunks and
suitcases.

"Gee! I've got enough stuff planned out to fill five trunks," declared
Randy. "I want to take all my clothing, and my fishing outfit, and my
football and baseball togs, and my gym suit, and I'd like to take along
my dumbbells, and my physical culture exerciser, and maybe a shotgun,
and that favorite paddle of mine, and----"

"And about five thousand other things," finished his twin. "I'm in the
same boat. But we've simply got to cut down and take only the things
that are actually necessary."

"We won't need any baseball things during this term," declared Jack.
"The Fall is the time for football--not baseball. And say! we don't
want to forget our skates. There's a river up there and also a lake; so
if the winter gets cold enough there ought to be some dandy skating."

"Yes. And if the lake is large enough there ought to be a chance for
some ice-boating," added Fred.

At last, with the aid of their parents, the four boys got their trunks
and suitcases packed. They were to leave home for Colby Hall on
Wednesday morning, and on Tuesday evening their folks gave them a
little send-off in the shape of a party given at Dick Rover's
residence. At this gathering many of their boy friends were present, as
well as a number of girls along with Mary and Martha. All of the young
folks had an exceedingly pleasant time, which was kept up until
midnight.

"And now for Colby Hall!" exclaimed Jack, after the party had come to
an end.

"That's it," returned Fred. "Colby Hall and the best times ever!"

"So say we all of us!" came from the twins.




CHAPTER VI

ON THE TRAIN


"Ready?"

"I've been ready for the last half hour."

"So have I. Come on, if we're going to catch that train."

"Yes, boys, you don't want to miss the train," came from Mrs. Dick
Rover. She gazed at Jack fondly. "Oh, dear! how I hate to have you go!"

"And how I do hate to see Fred leave!" sighed Mrs. Sam Rover.

"And my twins!" murmured Tom's wife. "I suppose they'll be getting into
all sorts of mischief at that boarding school."

"Oh, Ma! we're going to be regular little lambs there," declared Andy.

"Just you wait and see what fine records we send home," added his twin.

"The automobiles are waiting, boys," broke in Dick Rover. "Come. The
train is due to leave in twenty minutes, and you know how crowded
traffic is around the Grand Central Terminal."

There were hasty good-byes, a number of kisses and words of cheer, and
then the four boys left their mothers and the girls and ran down to
where two automobiles were standing at the curb. The twins and their
father leaped into one, and Jack and Fred and their fathers into the
other, and in a moment more the two machines were gliding down
Riverside Drive on the way to the Grand Central Terminal at
Forty-second Street.

It was a perfect autumn day, and all four of the lads were in the best
of spirits. To be sure, the fact that they were leaving home to be gone
for several months sobered them a trifle; but all were eager to find
out what was in store for them rather than to give thought to what had
been left behind.

As might have been expected, there was a perfect jam of automobiles and
carriages in the vicinity of the Terminal, and as a consequence the
lads had barely time to get aboard the train which was to carry them to
Haven Point, the town on the outskirts of which Colby Hall was located.

"Take care of yourselves!" cried Dick Rover.

"Learn all you can," added his brother Sam.

"And go slow on mischief," warned Tom.

"We'll remember everything," came in a chorus from the four boys; and
then, as they waved their hands to their parents, the long train pulled
out of the big, gloomy station and the trip to the boarding school was
begun.

Haven Point was located in the heart of New England, so that the boys
had a ride of several hours ahead of them. They had seats in a parlor
car, two on one side and two on the other, and they proceeded without
delay to make themselves comfortable, the porter aiding them in
disposing of their handbaggage.

"Good-bye to old New York!" cried Jack. "Won't we have a lot of things
to talk about when we get back!"

"I'm just crazy to see Colby Hall, to find out what it really looks
like," said Andy.

"That picture we had of it looked pretty good," was Fred's comment.
"But, of course, you can't always tell by a picture."

"Not much!" vouchsafed Randy. "A building may look all right enough in
a picture and still be about ready to tumble down."

The boys had left home in the middle of the forenoon, and expected to
have their lunch on the train before reaching Haven Point.

"When lunch time comes I'm going to fill up," declared Andy. "No
telling what sort of grub we'll get at the Hall."

"Father said they used to have first-class eats at Putnam Hall,"
declared Fred.

"Not always!" cried Jack. "At one time, while Captain Putnam was away,
the food got so bad there that the cadets rebelled and left the
school."

"Oh, that was before our fathers went to Putnam Hall," answered Randy.
"I heard about that, too. But while our fathers were there, the food
was very good, indeed."

After about half an hour's ride the train halted at a station, and
among the passengers to get aboard were two youths with suitcases.

"Hello! what do you know about this?" cried Jack, surprised. "If there
isn't Spouter Powell! I wonder what he is doing down here. He doesn't
live in this town."

"And look at the fellow who is with him!" burst out Fred. "Did you ever
see such a fat chap in your life?"

"Oh, say! I'll bet I know who that fellow is," declared Randy. "It must
be Spouter's friend, Will Hendry. Spouter told me about him. They call
him Fatty."

"And he fits his name," declared Randy. "Here they come now. They must
have seats in this car."

Spouter Powell, a tall, thin youth with a mass of wavy, black hair
overhanging his forehead, and wearing a small cap well back on his
head, strode forward towards them. Behind him came the fat youth,
struggling with a suitcase and puffing audibly.

"Hello, you Rover boys!" sang out the son of Songbird Powell,
cheerfully. "I thought you might be on this train."

"Glad to see you, Spouter. How are you?" returned Jack, grasping his
hand cordially. "Got a little friend with you, I see."

"Exactly! My chum, Will Hendry. Fatty, these are the Rover boys. This
is Jack, this is Fred, and these two little innocent lambs are the
twins, Andy and Randy."

"Glad to know you," came from all, and a general handshaking followed.

It was found that the new arrivals had two seats at the other end of
the parlor car; but there were other seats vacant near the Rover boys,
and an exchange for these was quickly made through the Pullman
conductor.

"Say! they don't make you pay extra fare, do they?" queried Andy, as he
looked at Fatty Hendry doing his best to squeeze into one of the
chairs.

"Not yet. But I don't know what I'm coming to," puffed the stout youth.
"Seems to me I'm taking on about a pound a day," he added, dolefully.

"Maybe you eat too much," suggested Randy, "Why don't you cut down on
your victuals?"

"Eat too much!" puffed Will Hendry. "I don't eat half as much as some
of you slim fellows. Why, Spouter here eats twice as much as I do!"

"Yes. But see the exercise I take," answered Dick Powell. "I walk at
least five miles to your one. And I spend lots of time in the gym,
too--something that you cut out entirely."

"Well, what would I be doing in the gym?" demanded the fat youth. "If I
got up on the rings or the bars, I'd pull the whole blamed business
down to the ground," and at this remark there was a general snicker.

Spouter Powell explained that he had been visiting Will Hendry, who
lived in the town where the two had boarded the train. He had been at
Colby Hall ever since its opening, and he had much to tell about the
school and those who attended it.

"Oh, I'm sure you'll like it," declared Spouter, growing eloquent.
"It's so delightfully situated on a hill overlooking the river, and is
surrounded by stately trees and a well-kept campus. The scene from the
front is exceedingly picturesque, while to the back the woods stretch
out for many miles. Soon, when the frost touches the leaves, the hues
and colors will be magnificent. The sparkle of the sunlight glinting
across the water----"

"Wow! Spouter is off again!" puffed Fatty Hendry. "I told you to be
careful," he pleaded.

"I was only acquainting them with the beauties of Colby Hall,"
remonstrated Spouter. "When one comes to contemplate nature, it's
necessary to understand what real harmony----"

"Exactly, exactly! Just so!" burst out Andy. "We understand what you
mean, Spouter. But please remember the scenery is there--it won't
move--and we'll have lots of time to look at it."

"Tell us about the boys who go there--and the teachers," broke in
Randy.

"Yes. The teachers especially," added Fred.

"Is there any hard-hearted fellow--like that Josiah Crabtree our folks
tell about?"

"We've got one fellow there--Professor Asa Lemm--that nobody likes,"
answered Spouter. "He's a language teacher. They say he was once quite
well off, and he constantly laments the loss of his wealth."

"And being poor now, he tries to take it out on every pupil who comes
under him," finished Fatty Hendry. "Oh, Asa is a lemon, believe me!"

"Well, you know what lemons grow for," commented Andy, mischievously.
"They are raised to be squeezed."

"And maybe we'll have to squeeze Mr. Asa Lemm--the lemon," added his
twin.

"Then all the other profs are perfectly good fellows?" questioned Jack.

"Oh, yes! Captain Dale, our military instructor, is one of the nicest
men I ever met, and so are Professors Grawson and Brice. The others
don't seem to cut much ice one way or the other."

"Tell us something about the cadets."

"Any bullies there?" queried Fred.

"Yes; we've got one bully all right enough," answered Spouter.
"Slogwell Brown is his name, but everybody calls him Slugger. He's from
the country, but he thinks he knows it all and is very overbearing.
You've got to keep your eye open for Slugger or you'll get into trouble
sure."

"Thanks. I suppose we'd better give Mr. Slugger Brown a wide berth,"
remarked Fred, dryly.

"I don't think I'll let him ride over me," answered Jack, determinedly.

"Then, there is Walter Baxter. He isn't a half bad sort, although he's
pretty hot-tempered. He had a room directly opposite Ned Lowe, who
plays the mandolin and is quite a singer. About sixty of the old
scholars are coming back, and then there will be quite a bunch of new
fellows--not less than twenty, I've been told."

"Gif Garrison wrote to us and spoke about football," went on Jack. "I
suppose they have some pretty good games up there?"

"Sure. We always have our regular eleven and a scrub eleven, and,
besides that, we have two or three games with rival schools. Gif was at
the head of the football eleven last season, and I suppose he'll be at
the head this year, although Slugger Brown would like that place."

So the talk ran on, the Rover boys gaining quite a little information
concerning the school to which they were bound. Then the porter came
through the car announcing the first call for lunch.

"Say! let's go and have something to eat," cried Will Hendry,
struggling to his feet.

"I thought you were going on a diet," remarked Andy, mischievously.

"Sure. But I'm going to have something just the same," answered the fat
boy. "Come on if you are going to the dining car. If you wait too long,
you won't be able to get a seat."

"My! I shouldn't think he'd want anything to eat for a month,"
whispered Fred to Spouter.

"Don't you believe a word of what Fatty says about cutting down on his
food," returned the other in a low voice. "He eats just as much as
anyone. That's what makes him so fat."

Possessed of the full appetites of growing boys, the Rovers were not
loth to follow the fat youth and Spouter into the dining car, which, to
their surprise, was almost full.

"We'll have to have a table for four and another table for two,"
remarked Jack to the head waiter. "Do you think you can find that many
places?"

"Come this way," was the reply; and the party of six started for the
other end of the dining car. They were about to take the seats assigned
to them by the head waiter, when a very fussy man, accompanied by
another man, pushed forward to crowd in at one of the vacant tables.

"Say! that's pretty cheeky," declared Randy. "Now I don't know where we
are going to sit."

"I'll fix you up on the other side of the car," said the head waiter.
The appearance of the boys had rather pleased him, while he did not
like the actions of the fussy man and his companion at all.

Spouter and his fat chum were behind the Rovers, so they did not see
the face of the fussy individual who had deprived the lads of one of
the seats. They sat down on the other side of the aisle, and the Rover
boys spread themselves around as best they could.

Fred and Jack had just sat down and Randy was doing likewise, when one
of the waiters came through the swaying car carrying a tray filled with
eatables. Suddenly the car gave an extra lurch, and Andy was thrown up
against the waiter in such a manner that the tray tilted from the
colored man's hand, and an instant later the contents of a large
platter containing a broiled steak with some French-fried potatoes was
deposited over the neck and shoulders of the fussy man in the seat near
by.

[Illustration: THE TRAY TILTED FROM THE COLORED MAN'S HAND.
_Page_ 64]

"Oh!" roared the man, starting up in great anger. "What do you mean by
this? What do you mean, I say?" he shrilled.

At the sound of this voice, Spouter Powell and Fatty Hendry looked up
in sudden wonder. Then, as some of the Rover boys commenced to laugh
over the mishap, Spouter clutched Jack by the arm.

"That man is Professor Asa Lemm!" he whispered.




CHAPTER VII

A SCENE IN THE DINING CAR


"You don't mean it!" gasped Jack. "The lemon of a professor we were
just talking about?"

"That's it!"

"Then I'm afraid Andy has gotten himself into trouble right at the
start."

"It wasn't his fault. It was the lurching of the train did it," put in
Fred.

"Just the same, I'd hate to be in your cousin's shoes," was Fatty
Hendry's comment.

In the meanwhile the waiter, by a lightning-like move, had managed to
save the broiled steak from slipping to the floor of the dining car. He
now had it on the platter, but the French-fried potatoes were scattered
in all directions.

"What do you mean, I say?" repeated Professor Asa Lemm in a loud, harsh
voice.

"Scuse it, boss," answered the waiter humbly. "'Twas the swingin' o' de
car what done it. Besides, one o' dem passengers knocked agin my arm."

"I think it was that boy's fault quite as much as the waiter's," came
from the man who was accompanying Professor Lemm.

"I couldn't help it," answered Andy. "The car gave such a sudden lurch
that I was almost thrown off my feet."

"We'll fix this all up, sir," broke in the head waiter, coming to the
front. "Take that steak back to the kitchen and bring some more
potatoes," he added to the waiter. "I am glad to say it hasn't mussed
you up very much;" and he handed the professor a fingerbowl full of
water and an extra napkin.

A number of passengers had witnessed the accident and were smiling
broadly. Spouter and Fatty Hendry were also on a broad grin, but their
faces took on a sudden sober look when they found Asa Lemm's gaze
directed toward them.

"Ha! so you are here," was the teacher's comment. "What business have
you to laugh?"

"Excuse me, Professor Lemm, I--I--didn't--er--mean anything," stammered
Spouter.

"Sorry it happened, very sorry," puffed Fatty.

"Is this young man traveling with you?" demanded Asa Lemm, suddenly, as
he looked from Spouter and Fatty to Andy.

"Y--yes--sir," answered the son of Songbird Powell.

"Hum! Is he bound for the Hall?"

"Y--yes--sir."

"Indeed? Then perhaps I'll see all of you later," muttered Asa Lemm;
and after that did what he could with the aid of some water and a
napkin to remove the traces of the accident from his person. In this he
was aided by the head waiter, who was profuse in his apologies over
what had occurred.

"I'm afraid you've got yourself into a pickle, Andy," whispered his
twin, when the latter had taken his seat at the table.

"I don't care. I didn't mean to do it. It was an accident. Besides
that, I think the waiter was as much to blame as I was."

"You'll never make old Lemon believe that," returned Spouter.

"Spouter's right about that," puffed out Fatty. "Once Asa Lemm gets
down on a boy--good night!"

"I wonder who the man with him is?" questioned Spouter.

"Maybe it's a new teacher," vouchsafed Jack.

"I don't think so," returned Randy. "I heard both of them talking about
some lawsuit and about money matters. Maybe the other fellow is a
lawyer."

"I guess you're right," said Spouter. "As I told you before, old Lemon
used to be worth a lot of money. Since he lost it he has been having
one lawsuit after another trying to get some of it back. Most likely
the other fellow is his lawyer." And in this surmise Spouter was
correct.

The accident had sobered all the boys, consequently the lunch was not
near so lively as it might otherwise have been. Still the irrepressible
Randy could not hold back altogether, and he got what little sport he
could out of it by putting some red pepper on Fatty's last mouthful of
pie. He used a liberal dose, and the pie had scarcely disappeared
within the stout youth's mouth when the boy began to splutter.

"Ug--ug--ugh!" came from Fatty as he made a wry face. "What pie! That
last mouthful was like fire--full of pepper!"

"I thought the pie was rather hot," answered Randy, coolly.

"Hot! It's nothing but pep all the way through!" roared the fat boy.
"Wow! let me have some water!" and he gulped this down so hastily that
he almost strangled, the tears running down his cheeks. The other boys
set up a laugh.

The boys had had some celery served with their lunch and several stalks
which were not particularly good still remained in the dish on the
table. When the boys were ready to leave, Professor Asa Lemm and his
companion were still at their table discussing the particulars of a
coming lawsuit.

"I'll give 'em something to remember us by anyhow," whispered Andy to
the chums when the party had arisen to leave the dining car; and before
any of the others could stop him he took up the stalks of celery and on
passing Asa Lemm dropped them in the professor's side pocket, leaving
the tops dangling outside.

"Gee! but you're some funny boy," chuckled Fatty, gazing at Andy in
admiration. "I wish I could think of things like that to do."

"You'll think of 'em some day--when you get thin," returned Andy,
encouragingly. "You see, I wanted to give him a bouquet to remember me
by;" and at this remark there was a general snicker. Two or three of
the passengers in the car had noticed Andy's action and all were
smiling broadly over the incident.

"If he ever finds out who did that, he'll be down on you worse than
ever," declared Jack, when the boys were once more in the chair car.

"Oh, well, what's the difference?" returned the light-hearted Andy.
"I'd just as lief be shot for a mule as for a hoptoad."

"I suppose he's going on to the Hall," remarked Spouter. "If he is, I
hope he doesn't get into the auto-stage with us."

"If he gets in the auto-stage, we might hire a jitney," suggested
Fatty. "There are six of us, and we could get one of the jitneys to
take us over to the Hall, baggage and all, for half a dollar."

A little later the train made a stop of several minutes at quite a
large city. The boys were tired of sitting still and were glad enough
to go out on the platform to stretch their legs. Here they saw
Professor Lemm and his friend leave the train and walk up the main
street of the place.

"Hurrah! we won't be bothered with him any more on this trip," declared
Spouter.

"Look!" cried Randy, suddenly, pointing to the two men; and as the boys
gazed in that direction they were just in time to see Asa Lemm pull the
stalks of celery from his pocket and throw them in the street. His
whole manner showed that he was much disgusted.

"And to think he has thrown away your beautiful bouquet, Andy,"
lamented Fred.

"Never mind, Fred; we have to get used to keen disappointments in this
life," groaned Andy.

"Won't he be coming back?" questioned Fatty.

"I don't think so--he won't have time," answered Jack; "here comes the
conductor now."

"All aboard!" shouted the conductor at that moment, and the boys had to
hurry in order not to be left behind. Then the train pulled out of the
station and the journey was continued.

"We certainly ought to have some dandy times," said Jack to Spouter, as
the train sped along. "I suppose your father has told you of all the
good times our folks had when they went to Putnam Hall and Brill
College."

"Yes, Jack. That is, he has told me about a good many things. Of course
I don't suppose he told me about some of the tricks they played."

"Well, I've heard from father and from my Uncle Sam that my Uncle Tom
was playing tricks almost continually."

"Then Andy and Randy come by their fun-making naturally."

"They sure do! And what do you suppose the folks at home expect me to
do?" went on Jack, seriously. "They expect me to hold those twins in.
Why! a fellow could no more do that than hold in a pair of wild horses.
You've seen a little of what Andy can do. Well, his jokes aren't a
patch to those Randy occasionally gets off."

"You don't say! Well, I'm not sorry. The last term at Colby Hall was
rather slow. Now maybe we'll have some life;" and Spouter's face
lightened.

While the boys had been at lunch the sky had darkened, and now the
train rushed into a sudden heavy shower, the rain driving against the
windows of the car in sheets.

"I don't like this much," said Fred, dolefully. "Maybe we'll get out at
Haven Point in a regular downpour."

"Oh, this looks more like a local shower than anything else," answered
Jack. "We may run out of it in a few minutes."

"Some rain, all right," remarked Randy, as the water continued to dash
against the windows.

"Just look there!" cried Andy, pointing out. "Before it began to rain I
noticed the automobiles on yonder road kicking up quite a dust. Now
just look at the water and mud."

"We'll be at Haven Point in twenty minutes--that is, if the train is on
time," announced Spouter, consulting his watch. "Too bad! Because I
wanted you to see the beautiful scenery with which the school is
surrounded. Oh! the woods are perfectly beautiful, and after a heavy
rain the torrent of water coming down the river makes the outlook one
of marvelous beauty. I have stood there contemplating the scene----"

"Turn it off, Spouter! turn it off!" broke in Fatty. "You promised me
on your bare knees that you would stop spouting about nature this
term--and here you start in the first thing!"

"Oh, you haven't any more eye for beauty than a cow," retorted Spouter,
ruefully.

"Why abuse the cow?" questioned Andy, gaily. "A cow has an eye for
beauty. Just you hold out a beautiful red apple to her and see if she
hasn't;" and at this the others grinned.

Haven Point was still five miles away when the boys saw that the rain
was letting up; but the ditches along the track, and the highways
wherever they passed them, were filled with running water, showing that
the downpour in that vicinity had been a severe one.

"Next station Haven Point!" called out one of the trainmen as he came
through the car.

"Better get your bags ready," cried Spouter. "There may be other
fellows going to the Hall, and we want to get good seats on the
auto-stage if we can."

"All right. You lead on, Spouter," answered Jack; "we'll follow you."

In a few minutes more Haven Point was reached and the long train rolled
into the little station. One after another the boys alighted, the
porter helping them with their suitcases and gladly accepting the tips
they offered.

Spouter headed for a large auto-stage drawn up on the opposite side of
an open plot behind the station. As the Rovers and their friends
started for the turnout belonging to Colby Hall, they noticed that
several other boys had also left another coach of the train and were
headed in the same direction.

"New fellows, like ourselves, I suppose," remarked Fred. "Let's get
ahead of 'em."

"That's the talk!" exclaimed Randy. "Come on!" and he set off on a run
beside Spouter with the others at their heels.

The rain had been falling heavily at Haven Point just previous to the
arrival of the train, and consequently the open place behind the depot
contained numerous hollows of water and mud, around which the boys had
to make their way as best they could. They were rushing along as fast
as their handbaggage would permit, when they came up side by side with
three other lads also bound for the stage.

"Look out there!" cried Jack as one of the strangers leaped into a
puddle of water, splashing the mud right and left.

"Look out yourself!" cried the other youth, a big lad, much larger than
any of the others.

"That's Slugger Brown--the bully I was telling you about," explained
Spouter as he continued to run.

Directly behind Slugger Brown came another youth, loudly dressed in a
checkered suit and a soft checkered hat to match. He was rather
fastidious as to where he stepped, and with his eyes on the ground ran
directly into Fred.

"Hi! look where you are going!" cried the youngest of the Rover boys,
and then, to keep himself from slipping down, made a clutch at Randy's
arm. This brought Randy around, and both he and Fred bumped into the
elegantly attired youth.

"Stop that!" cried the stranger, and then, seeing a puddle directly in
front of him, attempted to leap over it. But his foot slipped in the
mud and down he went flat on his back with a loud splash.




CHAPTER VIII

AT COLBY HALL


"My! look at that!"

"Some tumble that, eh?"

"Why! he sent some of that water and mud over me!"

Such were some of the exclamations as the loudly-dressed youth went
down in the puddle of water and mud.

He was flat on his back, and it took several seconds for him to turn
over and get to his feet. The fall had attracted the attention of
everybody making for the auto-stage excepting Spouter and Jack.

"Oh, my eye! you're certainly a sight to see," came from the biggest
boy in the crowd, Slugger Brown.

"It wasn't my fault that I fell," retorted the unfortunate one. "Those
fellows bumped into me and made me lose my footing," and he pointed to
Fred and Randy.

"No such thing!" burst out Fred, indignantly. "You bumped into us
first; and you only fell when you tried to jump across the puddle and
your feet slipped."

"I say it's your fault!" spluttered the boy who had gone down. His
hands were covered with mud and water and he stood there helpless,
filled with rage.

"Take your handkerchief and wipe your hands off," advised Slugger
Brown. He looked coldly at Fred and Randy. "If they tripped you up,
they ought to have a licking for doing it."

"That's the fellow who's responsible," answered the boy who had fallen,
and he strode up to confront Fred. "For two pins I'd smash you on the
nose," he continued, hotly.

"You leave him alone!" broke in Randy, and doubled up his fists.

The boy who had gone down had expected Fred to back away; but the
youngest Rover bravely stood his ground.

"Say! what's up back there?" queried Spouter, suddenly looking around
to see why the other boys had not followed him to the auto-stage.

"Looks to me as if somebody was going to get into a fight," returned
Jack. "See! one of those fellows just made a pass at Fred. Come on,
this won't do!" and he ran back towards the crowd that was gathering.

The boy who had fallen had, indeed, made a pass with one of his dirty
fists at Fred, but the latter had dodged the blow with ease and now he
had the loudly dressed youth by the arm.

"You behave yourself!" he said sharply. "I didn't knock you down, and
you know it! I'm sorry you got yourself all dirty, but it wasn't my
fault."

"You fight him, and you'll fight me too!" broke in Randy. "If there is
any blame in this it belongs to me as much as to my cousin."

By this time Jack had reached the group and pushed his way to the
front. As he caught sight of the face of the boy who had fallen, he
gave a quick exclamation.

"Well I never! Nappy Martell!"

"Do you know this fellow?" questioned Andy, quickly.

"I've met him before," was the reply. "He's Nappy Martell--the fellow I
had trouble with in front of the office in Wall Street--the fellow who
so mistreated that poor street peddler."

"Oh! So this is the same chap, eh?" broke out Randy. "No wonder he
wants to fight with Fred. He's a regular scrapper, in spite of his fine
clothes."

"What are you doing here?" asked Nappy Martell, curiously, as he looked
at Jack. Then his gaze suddenly shifted to Fred and Randy. "Are you
Rovers, too?"

"We are," was the quick response.

"Humph! No wonder you knocked me down. I suppose that fellow told you
all about me?" and Nappy pointed to Jack.

"What's the use of quarreling about a little thing like a tumble in the
dirt?" panted Fatty, who was almost out of breath because of his run
towards the auto-stage. "Come on! let's get to the Hall and see who is
there."

"I'm not anxious to fight," answered Fred, readily; "but I don't like
this fellow's talk."

"I'll talk as I please," blustered Martell. "And I'll fight, too, if I
want to."

"That's the talk, Nappy!" came from Slugger Brown. "Don't let any new
boys lord it over you. If you want to fight, go ahead."

"I owe these Rovers one," muttered the loudly dressed youth. "I had a
run-in with this one in New York," and he pointed to Jack. "They are
all of a kind--too fresh to live."

"There is no use of your talking that way, Martell," broke in Jack. "We
didn't come here to scrap, but everyone of us can take his own part if
it is necessary."

A perfect war of words followed, and the argument proved so hot that it
looked as if there would certainly be a fight with Fred and Randy, and
possibly some of the others, on one side, and Nappy Martell, Slugger
Brown and one or two of their cronies who had come up on the other. But
then came a sudden diversion as a heavily built and military looking
man came from the main street of the town and walked towards them.

"Cheese it, boys!" came from one of the lads present. "Here comes
Captain Dale. He'll report us all if he knows there's anything like a
fight going on."

At the announcement that Captain Mapes Dale, who was the military
instructor at Colby Hall, was approaching, the boys who had attended
the academy the term previous fell back in alarm. They knew the captain
to be a strict disciplinarian who abhorred fighting except in a
military way.

"Well, boys, are you going up to the Hall?" said the captain
pleasantly, as he came closer. The old pupils present saluted him and
were saluted in return.

"Yes, sir," answered Spouter. And then before any of the others could
speak he added: "Captain Dale, will you permit me to introduce some new
scholars?" and thereupon he mentioned the Rover boys' names.

"Glad to know you," said Captain Dale, and shook hands all around.

In the meanwhile Nappy Martell had dropped somewhat in the background
so that the military instructor might not notice the soiled condition
of his clothing. Then one or two other new pupils were introduced, and
the whole crowd made for the auto-stage.

The stage was a large affair, and Slugger Brown, Nappy Martell and some
of their friends kept to the front end, leaving the Rovers and their
friends together at the rear, the captain and a professor connected
with the Hall seating themselves between the two factions.

"This row is only stopped for the time being," whispered Randy to Jack.
"I think that fellow Martell is too ugly to let it drop."

"He's rather a big fellow to tackle Fred," returned Jack. "Why, he is
even bigger than I am!"

"That's the way with most bullies," put in Fatty. "They don't feel like
tackling a fellow of their size. They like to pick out little chaps."

"Oh, don't misunderstand me," returned the oldest of the Rover boys.
"Fred may be small, but he is very strong and wiry, and he knows how to
take care of himself. But I shouldn't like to see any out and out
fighting--at least not so soon. We don't want to get a black eye before
we get settled down."

"That's the talk!" came from Andy. "I'd rather have some fun than have
any fighting. I hope we'll find the other fellows at the Hall more
pleasant than this Martell and that great big Slugger Brown."

"It's queer you didn't mention Martell to us on the train," remarked
Fred.

"I thought he had left school," answered Spouter. "You see, he went
home before the term closed last Spring, and I didn't know that he was
coming back."

"He and Brown seem to be pretty thick," was Randy's comment.

"Yes; they were always together last term, they and a fellow named
Henry Stowell. Stowell is a regular little sneak, and most of the boys
call him Codfish on account of the awfully broad mouth he's got."

"Well, there's one thing sure," remarked Jack; "we'll all have to keep
our eyes open for Martell, Brown and Company."

While on the train the Rover boys had learned that Haven Point was a
clean and compactly built town containing about two thousand
inhabitants. It was located at the head of Clearwater Lake, a beautiful
sheet of water about two miles long and half a mile wide and containing
a number of picturesque islands. At the head of the lake was the Rick
Rack River, running down from the hills and woods beyond. Up in the
hills it was a wild and rocky watercourse containing a number of
dangerous rapids, but where it passed Colby Hall it was a broad and
fairly deep stream, joining the lake at a point where there were two
rocky islands. The distance from the railroad station to the Military
Academy was a little over half a mile, along a road branching off
through the main street into a country highway bordered on one side by
the river and on the other by a number of well-kept farms, with here
and there a small patch of timber.

"There's the Hall!" exclaimed Spouter presently, after the auto-stage
made a turn through a number of trees and came out on a broad highway
running in a semi-circle around a large campus. "What do you think of
the place? Looks rather fine, doesn't it?"

All of the Rover boys gazed eagerly at what was before them. They saw a
large stone building, shaped almost in the form of a cross, the upper
portion facing the river. It was three stories in height and contained
not only the classrooms and mess hall of the institution, but also the
dormitories for the boys. To one side was a small brick building which
at one time had evidently been a private dwelling. This was now
occupied by Colonel Colby and his family and the various professors. On
the opposite side was a long, low, wooden building.

"That's our gym," explained Fatty. "You can go in there any time you
want to, do a turn on the bars, and break your neck."

Down at the water's edge were several small buildings which, Spouter
explained, were used for storing the boats belonging to the Hall and
also as bathhouses. Behind the Hall were a stable and a barn, and also
a garage. And still farther back were a vegetable garden and some farm
fields, for Colonel Colby believed in raising as much stuff for the
Hall table as possible.

"That's the Rick Rack River," explained Spouter, as they passed the
stream. "We've some dandy times there swimming and boating."

"Don't you have skating in the winter?" queried Andy.

"Sure! And we have some great races, too."

In another moment the auto-stage drew up to the front door of Colby
Hall, and one after another the boys and Captain Dale and the other
teacher alighted.

"You new pupils may as well follow me right to the office," said the
captain. "You can leave your suitcases in the hallway until you have
been assigned to your rooms."

He led the way, and they followed through a large reception room and
into an elegantly appointed office where Colonel Colby sat at a
mahogany desk, writing.

"Some new pupils, Colonel Colby," announced the captain, and at once
the colonel arose.

"So you are the Rover boys, eh?" he said, his face lighting up with
pleasure. "I am certainly very glad to meet you. Of course you know
that your fathers and myself were schoolmates for many years?"

"Yes, Colonel Colby, we know that," replied Jack. "That is one reason
why they sent us here."

"So I understand. I am proud to know that my old friends think so much
of me," and the master of Colby Hall smiled broadly. "I am sure we are
going to get along famously."

"It certainly looks like a nice school," remarked Andy, frankly. "I
like it first rate."

"And so do I," added his twin.

"We hope to have some great times here," came from Fred.

Then one after another the boys were required to sign the register and
answer a number of questions regarding their age and previous
instruction, and the state of their health.

"I'll have Professor Brice assign you to your rooms," said Colonel
Colby, after the questioning had come to an end. "He has charge of that
matter so far as it concerns the older boys. The younger boys are under
the charge of Mrs. Crews, the matron."

The master of the Hall touched a bell, and when a servant appeared
requested that Professor Brice be summoned. The latter soon appeared, a
young man evidently just from college. He was introduced to the boys,
and then took them off to assign them their rooms.

"Hadn't we better get our suitcases?" suggested Jack.

"Yes; you might as well bring them along," answered Professor Paul
Brice. "That will save another trip downstairs. You can give your trunk
checks to me, and I will see that the trunks are brought up from the
station and placed in your rooms to be unpacked. After you've unpacked
them, they will be marked with your names and placed in the trunk
room."

It took the boys but a minute to reach the end of the hallway where
their suitcases had been left. Those of the twins were still there, and
also that belonging to Jack; but Fred's was missing.

"Hello! what's become of my suitcase?" questioned the youngest Rover,
anxiously.

"Maybe somebody carried it upstairs for you," suggested Jack.

All looked around the hallway and in the nearby rooms, but the suitcase
could not be found.

"Well, I don't think you need to worry," said Professor Brice lightly.
"There is no danger of thieves around here. Probably some boy picked up
the suitcase by mistake."

"Maybe," returned Fred; but then he looked at his cousins and shook his
head slowly.

"I guess you suspect Nappy Martell and his cronies," whispered Randy on
the way upstairs.

"I do!" answered Fred. "I think they took that suitcase to play a trick
on me."




CHAPTER IX

THE MISSING SUITCASE


In the letters sent to Colby Hall the Rover boys had requested that
they be placed in rooms close to those occupied by Spouter Powell, Gif
Garrison and their chums, and Colonel Colby had replied that he would
do what he could for them in the matter, although many of the choicest
rooms at the Hall had already been assigned to the old cadets.

"I can give you a choice of several rooms," said Professor Brice, as he
led the way to the second floor of the school. "Come this way, please."

He took them down a long corridor and into a wing of the building.

"This is our hallway," whispered Spouter to Jack. "I guess you'll get
pretty close to Gif and me after all."

Spouter and Gif had rooms numbered 19 and 21. Across the hall, Fatty
had number 16. 18, 20 and 22 were as yet unassigned.

"I can give you these three rooms," announced Paul Brice.

"But what about the fourth?" queried Jack. "There are four of us, you
see, and all these are single rooms."

"For a fourth room you might take the one next to that occupied by
Powell on the other side of the hallway," answered the teacher.

"That might do," returned Fred. "But we would prefer to be
together--especially as these rooms all connect."

"I think I can help you out if you want me to," came from Fatty,
good-naturedly. "If Professor Brice is willing, I'll move over to
number twenty-three, and that will give you four fellows numbers
sixteen, eighteen, twenty, and twenty-two."

"Oh, we don't want to disturb you, although it's very kind of you to
make the offer," remonstrated Jack.

"That's all right," answered Fatty. "I'd just as lief be next to
Spouter. The room is just as good, and I know you four cousins would
like to keep together." And so, after a little more talk, the matter
was arranged.

"Now the question is: How are we going to assign these rooms?" came
from Randy.

"I've got an idea," returned his twin.

"All right; out with it!" came from Fred. "I'd like to get settled so
that I can make another hunt for my missing suitcase."

"Why not live here just as we live on Riverside Drive?" answered Andy.
"Jack can take one of the middle rooms, with Fred on one side of him
and Randy and myself on the other."

"You've solved it, Andy!" exclaimed Jack, and so without further ado
the matter was settled.

"Now I'll institute a hunt for that missing suitcase," said Professor
Brice after he had made a note of the room assignments. "Most likely
some boy picked it up by mistake."

"If he did that, why didn't he leave his own suitcase behind?" queried
Fred.

"I'll look it up. Don't worry," said the professor, and then hurried
away, for there were many other matters demanding his attention.

The boys found the rooms small but pleasant. Each contained a single
bed, a desk, and a chiffonier, and also a small clothing closet. In one
corner was a bowl with running water, and each room contained two
electric lights. All of the rooms had connecting doors, but these, for
the most part, were kept closed, some of the pupils having their beds
or chiffoniers in front of them.

"You see, you are permitted to arrange your room to suit yourselves,"
explained Spouter, "so some of the boys have them one way and some
another. Some of the boys are even permitted to double up--that is, put
two of the beds in one room and use the other room exclusively for
dressing and studying."

"That's an idea," answered Randy. "Maybe Andy and I will do that." This
plan was followed out by the twins, who used the last room of the four
for a sleeping apartment and made of the other room a sort of general
meeting place for all of the Rovers.

"Where does that Nappy Martell hold forth?" questioned Fred of Fatty,
while he was helping the stout youth transfer his belongings across the
hallway.

"He and Slugger Brown and Codfish and that gang are all around the
corner, on the main corridor," was the reply. "That is, Nappy was there
last season. I don't know whether somebody else used his room after he
left or not."

"It was room sixty," put in Spouter. "Slugger has sixty-two. I don't
believe anyone went into sixty after Nappy left. You see, it was almost
the end of the term and all the cadets were settled."

"I'm going to take a look around," answered Fred. "I can't do anything
here anyway, with no suitcase and no trunk."

"I guess I'd better go with you," came from Jack. He did not wish to
allow his cousin to interview the big, over-dressed youth alone.

Leaving the others to settle down in the rooms as best they could, Fred
and Jack hurried through the hallway to the main corridor of the second
floor of the Hall. Old cadets and new pupils were coming and going in
all directions, and many were the glances of curiosity directed towards
the Rovers.

"Gee! some of those fellows certainly look nifty in their uniforms,"
was Fred's comment.

"They look like the uniforms our folks brought home from Putnam Hall,"
answered Jack. "My father's old uniform is up in our storeroom now. I
tried it on one day just for fun. They tell me they are patterned after
the uniforms worn at West Point."

"There goes an officer," whispered Fred, as a tall youth went by with a
sword dangling from his belt. "Look at the gold braid, will you? Isn't
it swell?" he added, in deep admiration.

"I can see your finish, Fred," laughed his cousin. "If you stay here,
you'll want to be an officer with a sword, and with lots of gold lace."

"I don't know about that," answered the youngest Rover, seriously. "I
guess all the officers have to be big boys."

"Nonsense! Size has nothing to do with it. Why, some of the greatest
military men in the world have been very small. Look at Napoleon, for
instance."

"Well, I'll see about that later, Jack. Just now I'd rather get on the
track of that suitcase."

It did not take the two Rovers long to reach that part of the corridor
where was located the room formerly occupied by Nappy Martell. The door
was open several inches, and Fred and Jack saw that three boys were
present--Nappy, Slugger, and a small, round-faced youth with a
particularly broad mouth.

"That little chap must be the sneak Spouter mentioned--the boy they
call Codfish," whispered Jack.

"That was a good joke all right, Nappy," piped out the small cadet, as
the Rovers came closer. "A fine joke all right all right!"

"You keep your mouth shut about it, Codfish," retorted Nappy Martell,
quickly.

"Oh, I won't say a word, believe me!" returned the other quickly.

Just then Slugger Brown peered out into the hallway and saw the two
Rover boys. He looked somewhat startled, and immediately placed his
hand over Nappy Martell's mouth.

"I want to see you, Martell," cried Fred without hesitation. "I want to
know what you did with my suitcase."

"I don't know anything about your suitcase," growled the loudly dressed
youth in surly tones.

"Yes, you do! You took it; and I want you to return it," answered Fred,
boldly.

"See here! do you want a licking?" burst out the New York boy, as he
doubled up his fists. "You deserve one for the way you tripped me up in
that mud puddle. You say another word, and I'll give you what's coming
to you," and his manner was very threatening.

"No use of fighting here, Nappy," remonstrated Slugger Brown. "Keep it
until some time when you can meet him outside."

"I didn't come here to fight," answered Fred. "But I want my suitcase."

"I don't know anything about your suitcase. Who says I took it?" added
Nappy Martell with sudden suspicion.

"I say you took it. There wouldn't be anyone else here to play such a
trick on me. Now, you must hand it over!"

"You go on about your business!" roared the New York boy; and as Fred,
followed by Jack, attempted to enter the room, he slammed the door in
their faces and shot the bolt into place.

Fred was thoroughly angry, and if it had not been for his cousin he
would have tried then and there to batter the door down. But Jack
caught him by the arm and pulled him back.

"No use of creating a disturbance so soon," said Jack. "We'd only get
into hot water, and maybe Colonel Colby would become so disgusted he
would send us right home. If Martell took that suitcase, he won't dare
to keep it, for that would be stealing. More than likely he'll sneak it
back to you by to-morrow."

"He ought to have his head knocked off of him," muttered the youngest
Rover. "Jack, I feel in my bones that that fellow is going to cause us
a lot of trouble."

"I shouldn't wonder," was the answer. "Remember, Fred; he is as angry
at me for the row we had down in Wall Street as he is at you over that
mud-puddle affair."

"Oh, dear! And I thought everything was going to be lovely when we got
here," sighed Fred.

There seemed nothing else to do, and so the two boys returned to where
they had left the others. A little while later their trunks came in,
and all spent an hour or more in unpacking these and stowing away the
various articles brought along.

"You'll be measured for your uniforms to-morrow," announced Spouter.
"And then, if the school has the right sizes on hand, you'll get them
at once. Otherwise, they'll be made to order and you'll have to wait at
least ten days for them."

"Oh, I hope they've got my size in stock!" cried Andy. "I'd like to see
how it feels being a cadet."

"Don't worry," answered his twin. "I guess we'll get enough of that
before we leave Colby Hall. Remember, you've got to learn how to drill,
and march, and shoot at a target, and all that."

"I think it'll be lots of fun," broke in Jack. "My father told me he
liked that part of the life at Putnam Hall very much."

"We're pretty well filled up here, it seems to me," came from Fred, as
he sat on his empty trunk surveying his surroundings.

"The men will come to take the trunks away in a little while," answered
Fatty; and this proved to be so. With the trunks gone the boys had more
room in which to move about, for which they were thankful.

"How about supper?" questioned Andy, presently, as a bell rang out
sharply.

"We have supper at six o'clock sharp," returned Fatty, quickly.

"Last year we were at a table with Professor Grawson," put in Spouter.
"He's a pretty nice man. I hope I get at his table again."

"Excuse me from getting at a table with a man like Professor Lemm,"
burst out Andy. "Gee! what will I do if they put me with him?" he
continued dolefully.

"Well, you'll have to sit wherever you are placed," answered Spouter.

"And what do you care so long as you get enough to eat?" questioned
Fatty.

But Andy shook his head. He thought if he were placed at the same table
with Professor Asa Lemm, it would be an actual hardship.




CHAPTER X

GETTING ACQUAINTED


"I don't see him anywhere," remarked Andy, as he and his cousins
approached the mess hall of the school.

The cadets were entering in little groups of twos and threes, for as
yet the regular term at Colby Hall had not begun. With the real opening
of the school, the cadets would have a dress parade previous to dining
and would then stack their arms outside and march in in regular order.

"Who are you talking about?" questioned Fred.

"Professor Asa Lemm. I don't see him at any of the tables."

"Maybe he didn't come to the Hall to-night. He might have had quite
some business to transact with that man who left the train with him."

As there were more tables than professors, some of the boards were
presided over by the senior cadets. There was a little confusion, due
to the entrance of so many new pupils, and then the Rovers were
assigned to a table presided over by a senior named Ralph Mason, who
was the major of the school battalion.

"I am glad to meet you," said Major Mason, as he shook hands cordially.
"I hope you will make yourselves at home," and he smiled in a manner
that won the confidence of all the boys at once.

The meal was a good, substantial one--for Colonel Colby believed in
setting a homelike table--and soon the clatter of knives and forks and
the rattle of dishes filled the air. Most of the boys had come in from
long journeys and were, consequently, hungry, so but little was said
while the meal progressed. Spouter and Fatty and several other boys
they had met sat at a table next to that occupied by the Rovers, but
Nappy Martell and his cronies were on the opposite side of the mess
hall, for which our friends were thankful.

"I think if I had to look at the face of Codfish while I was eating, it
would spoil my appetite," was Andy's comment during the meal. "They
ought to photograph his mouth and put it in the comic supplements."

"Yes. Or else they ought to get him to act in some of the funny
movies," returned his twin.

As soon as the repast was at an end, Fred sought out Professor Brice
and asked him if anything had been learned concerning the missing
suitcase.

"I am sorry to say I haven't learned anything," answered the professor,
a troubled look coming over his face. "I really must say, Rover, I
don't know what to make of it. Do you suspect anyone in particular of
having taken it?"

Fred was on the point of mentioning Nappy Martell's name, but suddenly
held himself in check.

"I wouldn't like to say anything about that, Professor," he answered
slowly. "I might be accusing a fellow cadet unfairly. If the suitcase
isn't returned by to-morrow I may have something to say about it."

"Very well. I think I understand how you feel about it," and the young
professor looked knowingly at the boy. "Did you have much in the
suitcase?"

"Yes, sir. It was well packed. You see, I wasn't sure whether my trunk
would come right along, so I carried all I could in my handbaggage."

When Fred joined the others, all of the crowd, led by Spouter, walked
down to the gymnasium. Here the Rovers were introduced to a number of
other pupils, including Ned Lowe, who was quite a mandolin player and
also a good singer, and a tall, studious youth named Dan Soppinger.

"Ned is our great singer," announced Spouter. "We expect some day that
he'll be singing in grand opera on the Metropolitan stage."

"Did you say grand opera or grand uproar?" questioned Andy, slyly.

"Opera, my boy! Opera!" repeated Spouter. "I expect some day that he
will thrill great audiences with exquisite renderings of the famous
solos by Wagner, Beethoven, Mozart, Donizetti----"

"Great mackerel, Spouter! what are you giving us--a musical directory?"
interrupted Randy.

"No. I was only giving you a list of the things I expect to hear Ned
sing sooner or later. Now, as for Dan here--he is the human
encyclopedia."

"If there is anything you don't want to know, ask Dan and he'll be sure
to tell you all about it," put in Fatty with a grin. "How about it,
Dan?"

"Say! that's a fine way to introduce a fellow," cried Dan Soppinger,
with a doubtful grin on his studious face. "Of course, I'm trying to
learn as much as possible, but there are a whole lot of things that I
don't know, and I'm not ashamed to acknowledge it. But say! by the way,
can any of you tell me what the date was when Jefferson was inaugurated
president?"

At this question there came a sudden groan, not only from Fatty, but
also from Spouter and Ned Lowe. Then with one voice the three shouted:

"Down with him! He's at it again!"

"I don't believe any of you know the date," retorted Dan Soppinger. "If
you did, you'd tell me. I am writing an article about the presidents,
and I've got to put that in. And then, here's another thing. Can any of
you tell me who crossed the Pacific Ocean to----"

But whatever the question was, it was never finished, for at that
moment Spouter, Fatty, Ned and several others piled on Dan Soppinger
and brought him to the gymnasium floor.

"Hi! You let up!" cried the victim, squirming from under the others as
best he could. "Can't a fellow ask a question or two without you
starting such a rough-house as this?"

"No questions to be asked, Dan, until the regular school term begins,"
answered Spouter. "Then all you've got to do is to go to the Rover
boys----"

"Not much!" came simultaneously from Andy and Randy.

"Do you take us for a school library?" questioned Fred, gaily.

"I'll answer all the easy ones, Dan," said Jack, good-naturedly. "The
hard ones I'll turn over to Spouter. If the question is a real sensible
one, he'll give you a nice little answer--one about twelve hundred
words long."

"Hurrah! Spouter is discovered at last!" cried Fatty. "Twelve hundred
words long just fits it--that is, if Spouter is in a hurry to cut it
short."

The Rover boys were much interested in what was taking place in the
gymnasium, and they even tried out some of the bars and swinging rings,
as well as one of the exercising machines.

"This is certainly an up-to-date institution," remarked Jack. "This gym
couldn't be better."

"How about the boats?" questioned Randy. He and his brother had owned a
rowboat on the Hudson River, and had often gone out in the craft.

"Oh, we've got half a dozen good rowboats, as well as several racing
shells," answered Spouter. "You'll probably get a chance to look them
over later."

While the Rover boys were taking in the sights to be seen in and around
the gymnasium, their attention was attracted to a tall, well-formed
cadet who was doing some clever work on one of the bars.

"He's doing that almost as well as a circus performer," was Fred's
comment.

"Yes; he's certainly very graceful," returned Jack. "I wonder who he
is."

"That is Walt Baxter," announced a cadet who had heard the talk.

"Walt Baxter!" exclaimed Randy. "I wonder if he can be the son of Dan
Baxter, the man who made so much trouble for our fathers while at
Putnam Hall."

"I'll soon find out," returned Jack. "But please remember--Dan Baxter
reformed, and more than likely his son is a first-rate fellow."

As soon as Walter Baxter had gotten through with his exercise and had
dropped to the floor, Jack, followed by his cousins, went up to him.

"Are you Walt Baxter--the son of Mr. Daniel Baxter?" he questioned.

"Yes," returned the other, and looked at Jack and the others with him
curiously.

"I am Jack Rover--the son of Mr. Richard Rover. These are my cousins,"
and Jack introduced them.

"Oh! is that so?" answered Walt Baxter, and shook hands rather
doubtfully. "I--I--am glad to know you," he stammered.

"And we are real glad to know you, Baxter," answered Randy, readily.
"We heard you were at this school. We hope that we'll all be good
friends."

"If we are not, it won't be my fault," and now there was a ring of
relief in Walter Baxter's voice. He lowered his tone a trifle. "I know
your fathers did a lot for my father, and I am very thankful for it. If
I can do anything for you fellows here, I'll certainly do it."

"And we'll do what we can for you, Baxter," answered Jack, quickly.

After that the talk became general, and Walt Baxter told much about
himself and the doings of the cadets at Colby Hall. When Nappy
Martell's name was mentioned, he drew down the corners of his mouth.

"I never had any use for that chap," he declared. "Once or twice my hot
temper got the better of me and we came pretty near having a fight. But
after that Martell gave me a wide berth."

"I think I've got Martell to thank for something that is missing," said
Fred, and thereupon related the particulars regarding the lost
suitcase.

"Say! I think I know something about that!" cried Walter Baxter,
quickly. "Yes, I'm sure I do!"

"Did you see Martell take the suitcase?" demanded the youngest Rover,
quickly.

"I can't say as to that, exactly. But I did see Martell sneaking off
through the backyard, past the stable, with something under his arm--a
big package wrapped up in a couple of newspapers."

"When was this?" questioned Jack, quickly.

"About four o'clock this afternoon."

"Just after we arrived at the Hall!" burst out Randy.

"What did he do with what package?" asked Jack.

"I don't know exactly, excepting that he went down past the stable on
to the roadway that leads to the farm fields."

"Maybe he took the suitcase and threw it down in one of the fields,"
ventured Andy.

"You didn't see him come back?" asked Fred.

"Yes, come to think of it, I did--about a quarter of an hour after
that," answered Walt Baxter.

"And did he have the package then?"

"No."

"Then I'll wager it was the suitcase and he left it somewhere down on
the farm!" cried Randy. "Let us go and take a look. We are permitted to
go out in the farm fields, aren't we?" he asked of Walt.

"Oh, yes. You can go anywhere you please during off hours so long as
you don't go out of bounds," was the reply. "If you want to go out of
bounds, you have to report at the office and get permission."

The matter was talked over for a few minutes more, and Walt Baxter said
he would gladly go along with the Rovers to show them just where he had
seen Nappy Martell with the bundle. The five boys were soon in the
neighborhood of the Hall stable, and then they passed beyond this to a
roadway which ran between the fields attached to the school farm.

"It's a pity it's so dark," declared Jack. "I doubt if we'll be able to
locate that suitcase even if we get quite close to it."

"I'll tell you what I'll do," declared Randy. "I'll run back to my room
and get my pocket flashlight. That will be just the thing."

It took him but a few minutes to obtain the article he had mentioned,
and with the flashlight to guide them, the five boys started along the
roadway behind the school. The light was flashed first on one side and
then on the other.

"Looks like a wild goose chase," declared Andy, after they had passed
two farm fields. "I don't think he would come this far with that heavy
suitcase."

"Here is a cornfield full of stacks," said Walt Baxter. "The stacks
would afford a dandy hiding place for almost anything."

They approached the first of the stacks, and Fred kicked some of the
corn stalks aside, but without result. Then they passed on to the next
stack.

"Hello! here is something!" exclaimed Jack, as the rays of the
flashlight fell upon the object. "Fred, I guess we've found it all
right enough."

"So we have!" cried the youngest Rover; and in a moment more he thrust
his hand in between the cornstalks and pulled out the missing suitcase.




CHAPTER XI

DOWN IN THE CORNFIELD


The other boys gathered around in curiosity as Fred brought forth from
the stack of cornstalks his missing suitcase. Beside the bag were
several newspapers crumpled up into a wad.

"Those must be the newspapers he had the suitcase wrapped in," remarked
Walt Baxter.

"More than likely," answered Jack. He picked up the wad of papers and
glanced at them. "New York newspapers, too," he cried. "Nappy must have
brought them with him from home."

"Was the suitcase locked, Fred?" questioned Randy.

"No. I didn't bother to lock it, because, you see, I had it with me. I
only lock a suitcase when I check it."

"Then you'd better take a look inside and see if your duds are all
right," advised Andy.

The youngest Rover quickly unstrapped the suitcase and threw back the
catch. Then, as Randy sent the rays of the flashlight into the bag, he,
as well as the others, uttered various exclamations.

"The mean fellow!"

"Fred, you ought to get after him for this!"

For a quick look inside the suitcase had revealed the fact that Nappy
Martell had opened the bag and thrown handfuls of dirt amid the pieces
of clothing and the various other articles Fred had packed therein.

"You'll have to have all that laundered stuff done over again before
you can wear it," declared Jack. "And you'll have to have those
neckties cleaned, too, I am afraid. Say! this is a shame!"

"Just wait! I think I'll be able to get square with Nappy Martell,"
muttered the youngest Rover.

"He ought to be reported for this," broke in Walt Baxter. "This isn't a
joke. It's a low-down, dirty trick."

At this remark all of the other Rover boys looked at Fred, and he
looked at his cousins in return.

"I don't know about reporting this," he answered slowly. "I rather
think I prefer to settle with Martell myself."

"That's the talk!" cried Andy. "If you reported this, some of the
fellows might put you down for a softy and a sneak. I'd rather watch my
chance and give Martell as good as he sent."

"And with interest," added his twin.

"If you fellows are anything like your fathers were before you, I
reckon you'll know how to get square with Nappy," remarked Walt Baxter.
"I've heard that the Rovers never took a back seat for anybody."

"I'll figure out what I'm going to do after I get settled here,"
returned Fred. He suddenly began to smile. "Say! things have been
happening since we left home, haven't they?"

"I should say yes!" answered Andy.

With Jack assisting his cousin in carrying the suitcase, the whole
crowd returned to Colby Hall, and here the Rovers started to separate
from Walt Baxter, first requesting him to remain silent regarding the
finding of the handbaggage.

"If we don't say a word about it, maybe Nappy will get worried," said
Fred; "and that is what I want him to do."

"He may go down to the cornfield to see if the bag is still there."

"Hold on!" burst out Randy, suddenly. "I've got an idea!" and then in a
few words he explained what had occurred to him. The others listened
with interest, and even Walt Baxter had to laugh outright over what he
proposed.

"I'll do it!" declared the son of Dan Baxter, readily. "I'll do it the
first chance I get. And, believe me, I'll fix it so Nappy Martell gets
into hot water!"

"I'd like to see what effect the story has on Martell," said Andy,
grinning broadly. "Can't you fix it so we can be around at the time?"

"Sure! When I get the chance, I'll drop you a hint."

"And now I must get this bag to my room without anyone seeing me," said
Fred.

"Better let Spouter or Fatty carry it up," advised Jack. "Then, if
Martell sees it, he won't know that it is your suitcase."

It was an easy matter to get Spouter to do what was required, although
he insisted upon knowing what was in the wind. When he was told, he,
too, laughed heartily.

"It will serve Martell right," he said. "I hope it worries him to
death."

As soon as the suitcase was safe in Fred's room, he sought out
Professor Brice, who was busy arranging the order of some classes.

"I wish to report that I've got my suitcase back, Professor," said the
youth.

"Ah, indeed!" was the teacher's reply, and his face showed his relief.
"I'm glad to know it. Did you--er--have any trouble?"

"Nothing that I care to mention--at least at this time," answered Fred.
"If you don't mind, Professor, we'll drop the matter."

"Oh, very well, Rover. Just as you please." The young professor looked
at Fred rather knowingly. "Of course, if there is anything wrong, you
can report it later," he added hesitatingly.

"Yes, sir. Thank you, sir," answered the youth, and then bowed himself
out of the office. In the hallway he was joined by Andy.

"Did he make you squeal?" questioned the cousin quickly.

"Not much!" was the reply. "He's a good sport. I guess he's been
through the mill himself."

Fred spent some time over the contents of the suitcase, brushing the
dirt from some of the articles and sorting the rest out to be cleaned
or laundered.

"It's going to cost two or three dollars to fix this up," he declared
to Randy. "I really ought to send the bill to Martell."

"Well, just wait first and see if we get any fun out of this," answered
the joke-loving cousin.

As was to be expected, there was far from a full night's sleep coming
to the Rover boys that night. The quarters were strange to them, and
there was more or less noise throughout the school building, a bunch of
scholars coming in on a late train and not getting settled down until
after midnight. There was also something of horseplay, although the
majority of the cadets were too tired from their journeys to be very
active.

"I suppose we'll have to stand some hazing and all that sort of thing
later on," remarked Jack before retiring.

About one o'clock the school seemed to settle down, and then one after
another the Rover boys fell asleep, not to awaken until the autumn sun
was showing well above the hills beyond Clearwater Lake.

"This certainly is a splendid location," remarked Jack, as he went to
the open window, stretched himself, and filled his lungs with the fresh
morning air.

"I don't wonder Colonel Colby picked this place out for a school,"
answered Andy, who had come in. "He couldn't have done better."

Not being accustomed to their surroundings, it took the Rovers a little
longer than usual to get washed and dressed. They were just finishing
their toilets when there came a light knock on Randy's door. He opened
it to find Walt Baxter standing there.

"Nappy Martell just went downstairs, and I've fixed that matter up with
Ned Lowe," said Walt. "Come on down if you want to see what takes
place."

He led the way, and all of the Rover boys followed at a safe distance.
They saw Walt enter one of the big living-rooms of the Hall, to one end
of which was attached the school library. Nappy Martell was at one of
the library tables glancing carelessly over a magazine. In the
living-room Walt was joined by Ned Lowe, and the pair walked up behind
Nappy.

"Why, yes, it was the strangest thing I ever saw," said Walt to Ned in
a loud voice so that Nappy Martell could not help but hear. "The fellow
seemed to come from a stack of cornstalks down in the cornfield."

"It wasn't one of the cadets, was it?" questioned Ned, innocently.

"Oh, no. I think this fellow was some kind of a tramp--maybe some
fellow who had been sleeping under the stack all night. But what he was
doing with such a fine suitcase gets me."

"That's right. Tramps don't generally have suitcases," returned the
other boy. "Did he come toward the school?"

"No. He dug out the other way just as fast as he could go."

"Poor fellow! maybe he was afraid if he came towards the school he
would be arrested. If he had a suitcase he couldn't have been just an
ordinary tramp. Maybe he was some working man looking for a job and
without the price of a night's lodging."

"Perhaps, Ned. At the same time, I don't think Colonel Colby wants his
cornstalks used for a hotel," returned Walt; and then he and Ned walked
through the library and went outside on the campus.

During this conversation the Rover boys, hidden behind some open doors,
had watched Nappy Martell closely. They had seen that he had caught
what was being said and had immediately lost all interest in the
magazine he was perusing. His face took on a worried look, and he
glanced inquiringly after Walt and Ned. Then he threw down his magazine
and started to leave the room.

"Come on, let us watch him," whispered Jack.

"Yes. But keep out of his sight," returned Randy. "We don't want this
joke spoiled."

Keeping well in the background, they saw Nappy Martell ascend the
stairs to his room. A moment later he came forth with his hat in his
hand.

"I bet an oyster against a soda cracker he's going down to that
cornfield!" cried Andy.

"Right you are!" answered Fred. "Come on, let's follow him;" and
rushing up to their own rooms the Rover boys donned their caps and
sweaters, for the day was unusually cool.

Nappy Martell left the Hall by a rear door, and the Rovers followed.
They saw the loudly dressed youth hurry toward the stable and then
disappear to the rear. Soon he was on the highway leading to the
cornfield.

"There is no use of our following him, for he might see us and that
would spoil everything," said Randy. "Let's wait here at the stable
until he comes back."

It did not take Nappy Martell long to reach the cornfield; and from a
distance the Rovers saw him rush around, first to one stack of
cornstalks and then to another. He was gone fully a quarter of an hour,
and came back looking decidedly worried.

"He thinks some tramp got that suitcase and went off with it," said
Fred, grinning. "Randy, that certainly was one great joke."

"Don't say a word," answered Randy. "Just let him keep on worrying for
a while. Maybe it will do him good."

As Martell passed the stable, the Rover boys stepped out of sight in
the building. They saw him re-enter the Hall, and then they took a
roundabout course which soon brought them to the campus, where they
joined Fatty and Ned.

"It's certainly a good joke," was Fatty's comment. "And any fellow who
would be mean enough to dirty a fellow's clothing like that ought to
suffer for it. Gee! I'll bet he's worried!"

Of course, such a joke could not be kept entirely secret, and before
long it was spread among a good many of the cadets. But great care was
taken to keep it from Slugger Brown, Codfish and all the others
belonging to the Martell crowd.

"And now to pay Martell back for his meanness!" said Fred a little
later. "This joke of Randy's is all right as far as it goes, but I
think I'm going to go him one better--that is, if I can get into
Martell's room."

"All right, Fred. Anything you say goes," added Andy, quickly. "Isn't
that so, Randy?"

"Sure thing!"

"Look here! You don't want to get into trouble," warned Jack.

"There won't be much trouble about this," answered Fred. "I am only
going to give Nappy Martell something to think about."




CHAPTER XII

LEARNING TO DRILL


While the Rover boys were talking matters over among themselves, Nappy
Martell had returned to his room, which was connected by a door with
that occupied by Slugger Brown.

"What in thunder made you run off in such a hurry, Nappy?" demanded the
other cadet somewhat surlily. "You didn't answer that question I put to
you at all."

"I had something else to think about," was the reply. "It looks to me
as if I'm in hot water."

"How's that?"

"Do you remember I told you that I placed that Fred Rover's suitcase
down under a stack in the cornfield?"

"Yes."

"Well, I heard Walt Baxter telling Ned Lowe that he had seen a tramp
down in the cornfield running away from one of the stacks with a
suitcase in his hand; so I went down to the cornfield to find out if
the suitcase was still where I had hidden it. It was gone."

"Whew!" Slugger Brown gave a prolonged whistle. "That certainly does
look bad. Did Baxter say where the tramp went?"

"He told Lowe that he had not come towards the Hall, but had gone off
in the opposite direction."

"Then that looks as if the suitcase was gone for good."

"So it does. And I don't know what I'm going to do about it," answered
Nappy Martell, gloomily. "Of course, I didn't think the suitcase would
be stolen."

"And the worst part of it is, the Rovers suspect you of having taken
it," was the comment of Slugger.

"Yes. But they can't prove it," cried Nappy, quickly. "That is, they
won't be able to do it unless you or Codfish give me away."

"You know me well enough to know I won't say a word, Nappy. And as for
Codfish, just give him to understand if he opens his trap you'll fix
him for it."

A little while later Martell and Brown went below. In the lower hallway
they met Fred and some of the others.

"Well, Martell, when are you going to return that suitcase?" demanded
the youngest Rover.

"I told you I haven't got your suitcase and don't know anything about
it," cried the loudly dressed youth. But at the same time his face grew
flushed and he could not look Fred in the eyes.

"You took that suitcase, and if you don't return it pretty quick you'll
see what will happen," warned Fred; and then he walked away with his
cousins, leaving Nappy Martell gazing at Slugger Brown, questioningly.
The pair conversed in a low tone, and passed on out of the hall on to
the campus.

"Now's your time, Fred, if you're going to do as you said," whispered
Randy.

"Right you are!" was the quick reply. "Come on;" and Fred led the way
upstairs again, his cousins following.

When they reached Nappy Martell's room, they found the door locked. But
the door to Slugger Brown's apartment was unfastened, and they quickly
entered this and passed into the room beyond.

"Say, Jack, won't you stand on guard?" questioned Fred. "They might
come back while we're at work."

"All right, boys. But be careful what you do. You don't want to spoil
anything. A joke is a joke, but it loses its flavor if it is carried
too far."

With Jack standing in the hallway on guard, Fred and the twins took
possession of Nappy Martell's room. The boy who loved to dress so
loudly was rather methodical in his habits, and had arranged all of his
clothing and other articles with great nicety in his chiffonier and his
closet.

"The bed first," whispered Fred; and in a trice the boys had taken off
the bed clothing and turned up the mattress. On the springs they placed
one of the bedsheets and on the top of this they distributed all of
Nappy's choice neckties and also his fancy-colored socks. Then to this
they added his cuffs, his fancy underwear, and all of his loose
jewelry. The articles were spread over the bed with care, so that they
rested as flat as possible.

"Now, we'll put the mattress back and then make up the bed as nicely as
possible," said Randy, who, of course, in a joke of this sort directed
operations.

"Gee! I don't believe he'll find those articles in a hurry," chuckled
Fred.

"They'll never find them until they come to turn the mattress over,"
vouchsafed Andy. "Some joke, believe me!"

"I was thinking about that clothing in the closet. I wonder if we can't
fix that up some way," mused Randy. Then he began to grin. "Just the
thing!" he continued, and walked to the chiffonier, from a drawer in
which he brought out a package of safety pins.

"What are you going to do with those?" questioned Fred.

"We'll pin up all the ends of the sleeves and the trouser legs, from
the inside," was the quick reply. "Come, hurry up!" and then the three
boys lost no time in doing as Randy had suggested. This done, they left
the room, leaving it, so far as looks in general went, just as when
they had entered it.

"There'll be some fun when Nappy wants one of those neckties or a pair
of those fancy socks," laughed Andy. "I wish I could be on hand to see
him."

"Don't you worry--we'll hear about it," returned Fred. "He'll suspect
me on account of that suitcase affair."

While it was true that the regular school term had not yet opened, the
new arrivals had been informed that they must be on hand to be measured
for their uniforms and also to be instructed by some of the seniors who
were present in drilling. The measurements of the boys were taken down
in the gymnasium under the directions of Mr. Silas Crews, who was the
gymnasium instructor and also the husband of Mrs. Crews, the matron for
the younger cadets.

"I hope they've got a suit on hand that fits me," was Jack's comment,
as he and his cousins walked to the gymnasium. "I'd like to see how it
feels to be in a uniform."

His wish was gratified, for a little later he was given an entire
outfit, which consisted of both a fulldress uniform and a fatigue suit,
as well as belt, shoulder straps, cap, and hat, and several other
things. Uniforms were also found for the others, and the entire crowd
lost no time in hurrying back to their rooms to dress up. In this they
were aided by Spouter, who had donned his uniform immediately upon his
arrival.

"Some brass buttons, believe me!" was Andy's comment, as he strode
around the rooms.

"Say! you put me in mind of a peacock," said the twin. "My, just see
how he swells up!" and Randy himself raised his chest as high as
possible.

"What are you going to be, Jack--fifth corporal or first admiral of the
rear guard?" questioned Fred.

"I'm going to be head soup-carrier for the bayonet squad," returned his
cousin gaily.

As soon as they had donned their uniforms, the boys returned to the
gymnasium, where they were placed in what was called an awkward squad,
and which was under the direction of Dan Soppinger. Here they quickly
learned how to stand erect with their toes on a chalk mark, and how to
hold their hands properly. Then they were given directions how to cast
their eyes "To the right," "To the left," and "Front." Then they
learned the meaning of "Right face," "Left face," and "About face."

[Illustration: THEY WERE PLACED IN WHAT WAS CALLED AN AWKWARD SQUAD.
_Page_ 125]

"All of you are doing pretty well," remarked Dan Soppinger to the squad
of eight under him. "Now then, we'll see what you can do when it comes
to marching. When I give the order 'Forward,' you balance on your right
foot, and when the word comes 'March!' you step out with your left
foot. And when you step out, do it like this," and he gave an
illustration by marching up and down in front of the squad.

To the Rover boys all this was very interesting, and they learned with
comparative ease. Only one of the awkward squad seemed to have
difficulty in marching just right, a lad named White.

"Don't lag behind, White!" cried Dan Soppinger, sharply. "Step right
out as if you meant it;" and after that White did a little better.

While the drilling was in progress, Colonel Colby came down to the
gymnasium to look on. He was pleased with the general results.

"I think you are doing very well, boys," he said. "Of course, you can't
learn to become first-class soldiers in a day. It takes hard practising
to do anything just right."

"When do we get guns?" questioned Andy, after the drilling had come to
an end.

"You won't get guns until you have learned how to march and how to turn
properly," answered Dan. "Then, when you do get guns, you'll have to go
in for the manual of arms."

"And how about learning how to shoot?" questioned Jack.

"That will come still later--after you have had experience in marching
and in handling your guns."

"Whoop! Me for a real soldier boy!" cried Andy, his eyes sparkling, and
then he began to hum a bit of doggerel he had made up on the spur of
the moment.

    "Johnny, get your musket--
    You must get your musket.
    Johnny, get your musket--
    You must get it now!"

"Wow! that's some song," was Fred's comment. "Better have it
copyrighted, Andy."

"Oh, I've already got a double-barreled patent on it," was the light
answer. "Anybody who steals it will get ten years in a bathing suit at
the north pole;" and at this there was a general laugh.

The boys were awaiting the arrival of Gif Garrison, who came in about
noon of that day. Gif was a big boy, and, as mentioned before, was at
the head of a great many of the athletic doings of the school.

"Glad to see you fellows here," said Gif, as he shook hands all around.
"My! but we're going to have some good times now, aren't we?"

"If we don't, it won't be our fault," responded Jack.

"We've just been learning how to become soldiers," explained Randy. "My
head is full of 'Eyes right,' 'Left face,' 'Forward march,' and all
that sort of thing."

"Oh, you'll get used to that, Randy, before you've been here very
long," returned Gif.

"Did you have a nice time getting here?" questioned Fred.

"I might have had a nice time if it hadn't been for one thing," was the
answer. "I came in on the same train with a professor that none of us
like."

"Oh! Do you mean Asa Lemm?" questioned Andy, quickly.

"That's it! What do you know of him?"

"We know quite a little," answered Jack, and related some of the
particulars of what had happened on the train.

"Oh, I can see your finish," said Gif with a serious look on his face.
"Old Lemon will never forget that happening. He'll be down on you for
it all the term."




CHAPTER XIII

FRED IS FOLLOWED


It took the Rover boys several days to settle down at Colby Hall.
Everything, of course, was new to them, and they took great delight in
roaming around the place in company with Spouter, Gif and the various
new friends they had made. During that time they continued to drill,
both in the morning and the afternoon; and it was surprising how
quickly they learned the manual of arms and also the other tactics
which go to make up the discipline of a cadet.

"This life is all to the merry," was Andy's comment one day, while he
and the others were down at the shore of the river inspecting the
boathouse with its numerous craft.

"It certainly is one fine place," answered Jack. "If Putnam Hall was
anything like this, no wonder our fathers thought so much of it."

Since Fred had asked Nappy Martell for the suitcase, the boy who was
addicted to loud clothing had avoided the Rovers. But through the cadet
named White they had learned much of what had happened in Nappy's room
when he came in after it had been "rearranged" by the Rovers.

"Nappy Martell was the maddest fellow you ever saw," Bart White had
declared. "He stormed all around the corridor, accusing nearly
everybody in that vicinity of having taken his neckties and his
underwear and a lot of jewelry. He even came to my room and threatened
to tell Colonel Colby if I didn't tell him where the things were."

"And, of course, you couldn't do that," had been Randy's reply, with a
side wink at the others.

"No. I told him I didn't know where the things were--because, you see,
I really didn't know," went on Bart White, innocently.

"And after that?" queried Jack.

"Oh, he stormed around, accusing this one and that one until some of
the boys got sick of listening and told him to shut up. Then he went
back to his room and slammed the door hard enough to burst it off its
hinges."

"Do you suppose he reported the matter to Colonel Colby?" had been
Fred's question.

"I don't know about that. You see, when a fellow gets as mad as Martell
was he's liable to do almost anything." And that was all Bart White had
had to relate concerning the affair.

So far, the Rover boys had not had anything to do with Asa Lemm. They
had met the sharp-faced professor once in the hallway and he had stared
at them in a fashion which made Andy shiver.

"He's got it in for me all right!" had been the declaration of the
fun-loving youth.

"I guess Gif was right," had been Jack's comment. "He'll have it in for
us the whole term. Too bad! I'd rather be friendly with every one than
have any enemies."

The Rover boys were just leaving the boathouse after having admired the
beautiful four- and eight-oared shells stored there, when they saw
Fatty Hendry coming towards them as rapidly as his stoutness permitted.

"Say! I've got something to tell you fellows," puffed the fat boy as he
came closer. "I just saw that sneak of a Codfish coming from Fred's
room. He looked awful sneakish, and I'm sure he was up to no good."

"I'll go up to my room at once and see," answered the youngest Rover,
and lost no time in speeding back to the Hall.

He bounded up the stairs two steps at a time. But when he reached the
room he occupied, a surprise awaited him. Everything was exactly as he
had left it. It may be as well to state here that every cadet at Colby
Hall was required to keep his room in absolute order, and a monitor
came around twice a day to see that this regulation was carried out. If
a pupil was lax in any particular regarding his room, he was given a
demerit in consequence thereof.

"Well, thank goodness! he didn't upset anything, even if he was here,"
murmured Fred to himself. "I wonder what the little imp was up to?"
Then a sudden thought struck him and he walked to the clothes closet in
the bottom of which he had deposited his suitcase. He found the bag in
the closet, but it was placed there in such a way that he was sure it
had been handled.

"Well, what have you found?" questioned Andy, who had followed his
cousin to the room.

"I think I know why he came here," declared Fred. "More than likely
Martell sent him here to find out whether I really had the suitcase or
not. The bag I know has been handled. When I placed it in the closet I
put the open end of the straps against the wall. Now the open ends are
on this side."

"Say! you're some detective, Fred!"

"I know how I left the bag. And he certainly had it out of the closet
and put it back."

"See if he did anything to it," went on Andy, quickly; and thereupon
Fred brought the bag forth and examined it. It was empty, just as he
had left it.

"Well, that will take the worry of the missing bag from Martell's
mind," was Fred's comment, as he and Andy left the room, this time
locking the door.

"Martell must have had some kind of a clue to the truth or he wouldn't
have sent Codfish here," was Andy's comment. "Maybe he got on to what
part Walt Baxter and Ned Lowe played in the trick." And in this surmise
Andy was correct. By the merest accident Codfish had overheard Walt and
Ned speaking about the joke, and at once he had gone to Nappy with the
news; and the upshot had been that Nappy had sent the sneak to Fred's
room to learn if the suitcase with Fred's initials upon it was there.

Late that afternoon both the old and the new cadets were assigned to
their places in the various classrooms and also given the text-books
which they were to study during the term.

"This begins to look like work," sighed Randy.

"Well, we didn't come here just for the fun of it," declared Jack. "We
came here, if you'll remember, to get an education."

"Oh, I'm not going to complain," returned his cousin quickly. "I'm
willing to do my share of studying. But after the splendid vacation we
had this Summer it will be a little tough at the beginning to get down
to the grind."

"That's just what I was thinking," declared Andy. "I wish a fellow
didn't have to study. Why can't some of our great inventors invent some
kind of knowledge pill so a fellow can just go and buy a few boxes and
then take them regularly?"

"Great idea, Andy!" exclaimed his twin merrily.

By the next morning all of the cadets had arrived, and also all of the
teachers and the other persons connected with Colby Hall. Then the
cadets were assembled on the parade ground and made to march into the
general assembly room of the institution, where Colonel Colby addressed
them. He spoke about the good work done by the cadets during the former
term at the school, and said he trusted that the present term would
turn out still better.

"At present all of our old officers of the battalion will hold over,"
he announced. "But in the near future--just as soon as we have got
settled in our classes--I will announce the time for a new election.
The major and the two captains to be elected must be in their senior
year at this institution. The other officers may be either sophomores
or juniors."

"That lets us out," whispered Andy to Jack. "Evidently no freshmen can
be officers."

"Well, why should we be officers?" answered his cousin. "We hardly know
a thing about soldiering yet. I think Colonel Colby's rule is a very
good one."

During the meeting in the assembly room all of the professors were
called on to say a few words to the cadets. The addresses delivered by
Professors Grawson and Brice and one or two of the other teachers were
well received; but it was plainly evident that when Asa Lemm came
forward to speak to the boys there was a distinctly cold feeling
towards him.

"I want to speak about attention to work," he said in a severe tone of
voice. "During the last term at this school there was not that
attention in classes that I desire. From now on I expect every one who
comes to me to pay strict attention at all times. Any laxity will be
severely punished."

"Gosh! He's a cheerful customer!" was Fred's comment.

"He'd make a fellow down on him almost before the term began," was
another cadet's comment.

"I don't wonder they call him old Lemon," added another youth.

"And now we're all ready to go to work," said Jack, after the cadets
had been dismissed. On the following day the classes were to begin.

There had been so much bustle and confusion throughout the school that
day that Fred, who was not feeling extra well, got quite a headache.

"You had better lie down for a while and rest," said Jack, kindly. "You
don't want to get sick."

"Oh, it's only a headache, and I'll soon be over it," declared Fred. "I
think I'll go out for a quiet walk along the river."

"Do you want me to go along?"

"No. I'd just as lief go alone, Jack. I think the quietness will do me
more good than anything."

This mood was not a new one with the youngest Rover, so Jack said no
more, and a few minutes later Fred slipped on his heavy sweater and
donned his cap and set out for his walk. His steps took him towards the
boathouse and the bathing houses, and then he continued on along a path
running close to the shore of the river.

Although the youngest Rover did not know it, his departure had been
watched by Codfish. The small boy lost no time in hurrying to Nappy
Martell and Slugger Brown with his information.

"You're sure he's alone?" asked Nappy, quickly.

"Yes. Nobody went out with him."

"Then that's our chance, Slugger," went on the boy from New York. "Come
ahead, if you want to help me."

"All right, Nap. But I thought you said you could polish him off
alone?"

"So I can. But I thought you'd like to see the fun."

"Can't I go along too?" put in Codfish.

"Yes, if you'll promise to keep your mouth shut about it."

"Oh, I won't say a word," returned the little cadet, quickly.

Putting on their hats and coats, the three cadets lost no time in
following Fred. It was quite dark on the campus and parade ground, but
they soon caught sight of the figure ahead as the youngest Rover moved
past the bathhouses to the river path beyond.

"He's alone all right enough," was Slugger Brown's comment.

"I thought I'd catch him sooner or later after I set Codfish to
watching him," answered Nappy Martell. "Now I guess I'll be able to
teach him to play tricks on me," he added sourly.

The three cadets quickened their pace, and in a moment more caught up
to Fred just as he reached a point on the river shore almost out of
sight of the Hall. Fred had dipped his handkerchief in the water and
used the same for wiping off his aching brow.

"See here, Rover, I want to talk to you!" cried Nappy Martell, and,
striding forward, he caught Fred roughly by the arm.

Of course, the youngest Rover was startled, not dreaming that anyone
was following him. Yet he showed no signs of fear.

"What do you want of me, Martell?" he asked quietly.

"I'll show you what I want of you!" cried Nappy Martell in sudden
wrath. "I'll teach you to play tricks on me! Try to make me believe
your suitcase was stolen, will you? And then come to my room and
rough-house things, eh? Just wait till I get through with you and
you'll wish you'd never been born!"




CHAPTER XIV

THE FIGHT


Fred Rover realized that he was in an unenviable situation. Nappy
Martell was thoroughly angry, and evidently Slugger Brown and Codfish
were present to aid him in anything he might undertake to do.

Many another boy might have thought discretion the better part of valor
and taken to his heels. But the youngest Rover was not built that way.
He had been taught to stick up for his rights and defend himself
whenever the cause was a just one.

"What do you propose to do, Martell?" he questioned as quietly as he
could.

"I'll show you what I'll do," blustered the other. "You thought it was
a fine joke to put most of my things under the mattress of my bed,
didn't you?"

"Who told you I did that?"

"Never mind. I found it out, and that's enough. Do you dare to deny
it?"

"I don't suppose there will be any use in denying it," was Fred's
reply. "It was done as a joke, to square accounts over the missing
suitcase."

"Bah! you needn't talk to me, Rover! I know the kind you and your
cousins are. I'm going to fix you. How do you like that?" and as he
uttered the last word, Nappy Martell hauled back and slapped Fred on
the cheek.

It was a comparatively light blow, but it aroused all the fighting
blood in the youngest Rover boy's nature, and without stopping to think
twice, he doubled up his fists and hit the larger youth a stinging blow
in the jaw.

"Gee! look at that!" murmured Codfish, who had not expected such an
onslaught from the smaller cadet.

"Say, Nappy, he's coming back at you!" burst out Slugger Brown, in
surprise.

"Coming back at me nothing!" roared Martell; and, leaping forward, he
rained a succession of blows on Fred--hitting him in the shoulder, the
chest and then the left ear.

In another moment the two cadets were at it "hammer and tongs." As they
circled around, Codfish put out his foot, trying to trip Fred up. He
failed in this, but a moment later Slugger Brown tried the trick with
success, and the youngest Rover came down heavily and an instant later
Nappy Martell landed on top of him.

"Get off of me! That wasn't fair!" exclaimed Fred. "Those other fellows
tripped me up."

"Aw, shut up!" retorted Martell; and while he held Fred down with his
body he continued to pommel the smaller youth with his fists.

"Don't go too far," said Slugger Brown presently, in alarm. "If you do
that, he may squeal and get you into trouble."

"Somebody is coming!" screamed Codfish, suddenly, as he saw a number of
forms running across the parade ground in the direction of the river
road. "Four or five of 'em."

"It's Jack Rover and his chums," muttered Slugger Brown.

He was right. Jack was approaching, followed by Spouter, Fatty, Walt
Baxter and Gif Garrison.

"I was sure they were up to no good--following Fred that way," Walt
Baxter was saying.

"I'm glad you told me about this, Walt," answered Jack. "Three against
one is no fair deal."

As the five cadets came rushing up, Codfish viewed their approach with
alarm and then retreated several paces. Slugger Brown, however, stood
his ground.

"Hi you! let my cousin alone!" cried Jack, and, leaping forward, he
caught Nappy Martell by the collar and hurled him into some bushes.

"Say, this isn't any of your fight," put in Slugger Brown, uglily.
While he spoke, Fred lost no time in leaping to his feet and there he
stood, once more on the defensive.

"No one asked you to butt in, Jack Rover!" stormed Nappy Martell. "You
keep out of this."

"Why did he attack you, Fred?"

"Huh! you know the reason as well as he does," burst out Martell. "You
played a trick on me about that suitcase, and then you came and
rough-housed my room."

"One trick was only played to square up for the other, Martell,"
answered Jack, calmly. "You ought to be man enough to cry quits and let
it go at that."

"I won't cry quits--not until I've given this fellow a good licking!"
roared Nappy Martell; and then before anyone could stop him he lunged
another blow at Fred, who, however, was quick enough to dodge it.

"Stop!" Jack's voice was now unusually stern, and stepping up to Nappy
Martell he caught the fellow by the arm and swung him around so that
the pair faced each other. "If you want to fight, Martell, take
somebody nearer your size."

"Oh, Jack! I'm not afraid of him," burst out Fred. Strange to say, the
excitement of the occasion seemed to have chased his headache
completely away.

"Maybe you want me to fight you," sneered Nappy Martell.

"You'll have to fight me if you don't leave my cousin Fred alone."

"See here, Rover! you've no right to butt in like this," interposed
Slugger Brown. "Why don't you let the pair finish it?"

"Those two fellows," cried Fred, pointing to Slugger Brown and Codfish,
"tripped me up. It wasn't fair--three against one."

"We didn't trip him up at all," came from the two accused ones
simultaneously.

"They did, Jack. First Codfish tried it, and then Brown put out his
foot and I went down, and Martell at once pounced on me."

"That's no way to fight!" broke out Spouter.

"It was certainly a mean trick," was Gif's comment.

"If there is any fighting to be done, I guess we're on hand to see that
it's done fairly," came from Walt Baxter.

A perfect war of words followed, in the midst of which Nappy Martell
seemed to lose complete control of his temper. He rushed at Jack and
hit the youth two quick blows, one in the chest and the other on the
chin. The oldest Rover was not looking for this attack, and he
staggered backward into some bushes, all but losing his balance.

"That's the way to do it, Nappy!" cried Slugger Brown, excitedly. "Give
it to him!"

Jack was as much surprised as Fred had been when first hit, but he was
able to recover much more quickly than his cousin. He leaped forward
from the bushes, doubled up his fists, and the next instant sent in a
crashing blow that landed straight on Martell's nose. He followed up
this blow with another on the other youth's chin which sent Martell
sprawling flat on his back.

"Hurrah! that's the way to do it, Jack!" cried Spouter.

"Say! has he got to fight two of you Rovers?" questioned Slugger Brown.

"No. He's got to fight me only," answered Jack, quickly. He turned to
his cousin. "Fred, you keep out of this."

"But he started on me," pleaded the youngest Rover. "And now that you
are here to see fair play, I'm not afraid of him."

"Never mind. It's my fight, anyway," went on Jack. "I owe him one for
the way he treated me down in Wall Street that day."

While this talk was going on, Nappy Martell had scrambled to his feet.
His nose was swollen and bleeding profusely.

"You imp!" he howled, and lunged another attack at Jack.

He was able to land two blows on Jack's chest, but they were not
powerful enough to do harm. Then, as Martell circled around, the oldest
Rover boy managed to get in another blow, this time on his opponent's
mouth, loosening two of Nappy's teeth.

"That's the way to do it, Jack!"

"Give him a few more like that and he'll soon quit."

"Go for him, Nappy! You can do him up if you'll only try," bellowed
Slugger Brown in excitement.

"You keep back, Slugger," warned Walt Baxter. "Don't you interfere."

"I didn't interfere."

"Well, you're too close, anyway. Keep back like the rest of us."

"That's just what I say," broke out Spouter.

Realizing that the others were in the majority, Slugger Brown kept his
distance from the pair who were fighting. Codfish was trembling like a
leaf, and cowered well in the background.

Around and around circled the two contestants, and for a few minutes
neither of them seemed to have the advantage. Jack was hit in the arm,
and returned by landing another blow, this time on Nappy's chest. Then
the big youth aimed a kick at the Rover boy's stomach.

"Hi! that's no way to fight!" cried Gif, indignantly.

Jack had managed to escape the kick, and he had put down one hand so
quickly that Nappy Martell had been in great danger of being caught and
thrown on his back.

In the midst of the contest several forms could be seen hurrying across
the campus and the parade ground, and in a moment more Andy and Randy
came into view, followed by Bart White and some other cadets.

"It's a fight!"

"Why, what do you know about this! Jack is fighting Nappy Martell!"

"Martell tackled me first, but Jack took the fight out of my hands,"
explained Fred to his cousins.

"Who has got the best of it?" questioned Bart White, excitedly.

"I think Jack has the best of it so far," answered Gif; "but the fight
isn't finished yet," he added, a bit anxiously.

"You're right it isn't finished yet!" retorted Slugger Brown. "Just you
wait until Nappy gets his second wind, and then you'll see what he'll
do to Rover."

Once more the two contestants were circling around, each trying to get
in some kind of telling blow. Various passes were made, and in the
excitement the pair left the roadway and began to circle around on the
grassy bank of the river.

"Look out there, or you'll both go overboard!" sang out Spouter in
alarm.

The cadets who were fighting were too engrossed to pay attention to
this warning. They kept on circling about, and then Nappy Martell made
a wild and vicious pass for Jack's head. The latter dodged like
lightning, came up under his opponent's arm, and the next instant
landed a swinging blow on Martell's ear which sent him staggering
backward several paces, to fall with a splash into the river.




CHAPTER XV

IN THE TOWN


"Hello! Nappy's overboard!"

"Wow! that was some crack on the ear!"

"Can he swim?"

"Sure, he can swim! If he can't we can haul him in easy enough."

"I don't believe the river is very deep here."

Such were some of the words uttered immediately after the
well-delivered blow from Jack Rover had sent his opponent spinning into
the swiftly flowing waters of the Rick Rack River. Fortunately, the
moon and the stars were shining brightly, so it was not as dark as it
otherwise might have been. Indeed, had it not been for the brightness
of the night it is doubtful if the fight could have been carried on as
already described.

All of the cadets present lined up along the river bank, and an instant
later saw Nappy Martell come to the surface. He was striking out wildly
and spluttering at the same time, showing that he had gone overboard
with his mouth open and had swallowed some of the water. One hand and
shoulder were covered with mud from the river bottom, for at that
particular point the stream was less than five feet deep.

"Oh, he'll be drowned! I know he'll be drowned!" screamed Codfish in
terror.

"You shut up, you little imp!" burst out Gif. "You'll arouse the whole
school, and there is no need of doing that."

By this time Nappy Martell was close to the river bank, and he reached
up his hand appealingly to those above him.

"Here, give me your hand, Nappy!" cried Slugger Brown, and reached down
to aid his crony. But the bank was a slippery and treacherous one, and
he was in danger of going overboard himself.

"Wait a minute, Slugger--let me help you," cried Spouter, and he took
hold of the big youth's left hand.

Then the others also came forward to do what they could, and in a few
seconds more Nappy Martell was hauled up on the grass. He was pretty
well exhausted and panted painfully.

"I'm sorry you went overboard, Martell," said Jack, promptly. "I didn't
expect to knock you into the river."

"You did it on purpose! You know you did!" returned the other youth
wrathfully. "Yo--you--d--d--don't know how to f--f--fight fair," he
added, his teeth suddenly beginning to chatter, for the unexpected bath
at this season had proved awfully cold.

"Say! he's shivering like a leaf!" cried Fred.

"You had better get back to the Hall and change your clothing," advised
Jack.

"I won't change anything until I've given you a licking," roared Nappy
Martell.

"Oh, say, Nappy, you had better call it off for to-night," interposed
Slugger Brown. "You can't fight in those wet clothes. Finish it some
other time."

"I won't!" came the ejaculation, and then the dripping boy hurled
himself once more at Jack.

But he was blinded by water and mud as well as by rage; and the oldest
Rover boy easily evaded the new onslaught. Then, of a sudden, he
reached out and caught Martell by both wrists and held him in a
vise-like grasp.

"Now, see here, Martell, don't be foolish," he said sternly. "I don't
want to fight a fellow who has been overboard and is wringing wet.
You'll catch your death of cold hanging around here in this night air.
Go on back to the Hall and change your clothing. If you want to finish
this some other time, I'll be ready for you."

"That's the talk!" added Spouter.

"It would be foolish to go on in this condition," remarked Gif. "Call
it off, by all means."

"You might as well do it," came from Slugger Brown. "You wouldn't have
any kind of a fair show, Nappy--after having been in the river, and
after having had to lick the other Rover first."

"He didn't lick me!" burst out Fred, indignantly.

More words followed, but in the end Nappy Martell consented to return
to the Hall and went off in company with Slugger Brown, Codfish, and
one or two more friends who had chanced to come up.

"You'll have to slip in on the sly, or else somebody may ask some
unpleasant questions," remarked Slugger Brown on the way to the school.

"You lend me your coat, and I'll take mine off and make a bundle of
it," answered Martell; and so it was arranged. The others clustered
around the dripping youth and thus they managed to get him to his room
without being detected.

"He'll never forgive you, Jack, for knocking him into the river," said
Randy, while the Rovers and their friends walked slowly back to the
Hall.

"I guess you're right," was the answer.

"And what is more, he'll probably try to play some underhanded trick on
you," added Andy.

"I wish I had had the chance--I think I could have knocked him out
myself," broke in Fred. "I'm not afraid of him, even if he is bigger
than I am."

All those who had witnessed the contest were cautioned to keep quiet
about it. Yet in a school like Colby Hall it was next to impossible to
keep the particulars of the affair from circulating, and before long
many of the cadets knew the truth. The majority were of the opinion
that Jack could readily have defeated Martell had the contest been
fought to a finish.

"He'll undoubtedly lay for you, Jack," remarked Fred that night, in
talking the matter over in their rooms.

"Maybe he'll lay for you, Fred," smiled his big cousin. "You had better
keep your eyes peeled."

"I guess we had better all watch out," was Randy's comment.

But for the next few days Nappy Martell, as well as his particular
crony, Slugger Brown, kept to themselves, while Codfish was so timid
that he hardly dared to show himself.

About a week, including Sunday, went by, and the school began to settle
down to its regular routine of studies. The Rover boys had had all
their classes mapped out for them, and had also been assigned to a
class in gymnasium work. Gymnastics especially suited the agile Andy,
who nearly always preferred action to sitting still. The Rover boys on
leaving home had promised their parents that they would pay strict
attention to their studies, and now they did their best in that
direction. Of course, some of the lessons were rather hard, and Fred,
being the youngest, often found he needed assistance from the others.

During those days they quickly discovered why Dan Soppinger had been
referred to by one of their friends as the "human question mark." Dan
always wanted to know something, and he did not hesitate to ask for
information on any and all occasions, no matter what else might happen
to be under discussion at the time.

"He'll die asking questions," remarked Andy. "I never knew a fellow who
could fire questions at a person so rapidly."

It was now ideal weather for football, and as soon as the school became
settled football talk filled the air. Gif Garrison had been at the head
of the football eleven the Fall previous, and now he was looked upon to
whip the new team into shape.

"We generally play three games with outside schools," explained Gif to
the Rovers one day. "First we play Hixley High. Then we play the
Clearwater Country Club. And after that we wind up usually with our big
game with Columbus Academy."

"It must be great sport," answered Jack.

"Did you ever get a chance to play football in New York?"

"Oh, yes, we occasionally played a game."

"Jack would make a first-rate football player if he had the chance,"
put in Randy. "I've seen him play, and I know."

"Yes. And Fred makes a pretty good player, too," added Andy. "Of
course, he's small and light in weight, but he's as quick on his feet
as they make 'em."

"How about you and Randy?" questioned Gif.

"Oh, we never cared very much to play football. We'd rather have some
fun in the crowd looking on," was the answer of the twin.

At this, the football leader smiled. "Well, we've got to have some kind
of an audience--otherwise there wouldn't be any fun in pulling off a
game." He looked at Jack and Fred, thoughtfully. "I'm going to keep you
two fellows in mind, and if I can put one or both of you on the team,
I'll do it. Of course, you'll have your try-outs on the scrub first."

"Well, you can put me on the scrub as soon as you please," answered
Jack, promptly.

"I'll be glad of the chance," added Fred.

As was to be expected, no sooner had the boys attempted to settle down
at Colby Hall than they began to want for a number of things which they
had failed to bring from home. These articles were, for the most part,
of small consequence; yet the boys could not get along very well
without them, and so resolved on the following Saturday, which was a
holiday, to walk down to Haven Point and do some shopping.

"I'd like first rate to take a look around the town, too," said Randy.
"It looked like a pretty good sort of place."

"Maybe we can go to the moving picture show there," put in his brother.
"We'll have time enough."

"Perhaps--if the films look worth while," answered Jack.

They had already learned that the moving picture show in the town was
of the better class, and that the pupils of the school were allowed to
attend a performance whenever they had time to do so.

It did not take the four cousins long to walk the distance to Haven
Point. They left the school directly after lunch, and inside of an hour
had purchased the various small articles which they desired. Then all
headed for the moving picture theater, which was located on the main
street in the busiest portion of that thoroughfare.

As the boys walked up to the booth to purchase their admission tickets,
they saw a bevy of girls just entering the door. They were all well
dressed and chatting gaily.

"Nice bunch, all right," was Randy's comment. "I wonder where they are
from?"

"I think I know," answered Jack. "Spouter was telling me there is a
girls' school on the other side of this town, called Clearwater Hall.
It's about as large as Colby Hall. More than likely those girls come
from that school."

"I wish we knew them," said Andy. "I wonder if some of the cadets from
our school don't know them."

"More than likely some of our fellows know some of the girls," said
Jack. "We may be able to become acquainted with them some day."




CHAPTER XVI

AT THE MOVING PICTURE THEATER


The moving picture theater was large enough to hold several hundred
people, and when the boys entered they found the place almost full.

"There are some seats--over on the left," remarked Jack, as he pointed
them out. "Two in one row and two directly behind."

"Why not two in one row and two directly in front?" returned Andy,
gaily, and then headed for the seats.

"You and Fred had better sit in front, and Randy and I can take the
back seats," went on Jack; and so it was arranged.

They had come in between pictures and while some doors had been open
for ventilation, so that the place was fairly light. As Jack took his
seat he noticed that the girls who had come in just ahead of the boys
were sitting close by.

"They certainly do look like nice girls," was Jack's mental comment;
and he could not help but cast a second glance at the girl sitting
directly next to him. She was attired in a dark blue suit trimmed in
fur and held a hat to match in her lap. Jack noted that she was fair of
complexion, with dark, wavy hair.

"I'm thinking this is going to be a pretty interesting picture for us,
Andy," remarked Randy, as the name of the production was flashed upon
the screen. "'The Gold Hunter's Secret--A Drama of the Yukon,'" he
read. "That must have been taken in Alaska."

"That's right, Randy," returned his twin. "Gee! I hope this Alaskan
play doesn't affect us; like that other Alaskan play once affected
dad," he went on, referring to a most remarkable happening, the details
of which were given in "The Rover Boys in Alaska."

"It isn't likely to," answered Randy, promptly. "Poor dad was in no
mental condition to attend that show, Uncle Dick once told me. He had
been knocked on the head with a footstool, and that had affected his
mind."

The four Rovers were soon absorbed in the stirring drama of the Alaskan
gold fields, and for the time being almost forgot their surroundings.
In the midst of the last reel, however, Jack felt the girl beside him
stirring.

"It's my hatpin," she whispered. "It just fell to the floor."

"I'll get it," he returned promptly, and started to hunt in the dark.
He had to get up and push up his seat before the hatpin was recovered.

"Oh, thank you very much," said the girl sweetly, when he presented the
article to her.

"You are welcome, I'm sure," returned the Rover boy; and then he added
with a smile: "Accidents will happen in the best of families, you
know," and at this both the girl and two of her companions giggled.

The photo-drama was presently finished and was followed by a
mirth-provoking comedy at which the entire audience laughed heartily.
Then came a reel of current events from various portions of the globe.

"Say, there's something worth looking at!" cried Fred, as a boat race
was flashed on the screen.

"Right you are," responded Jack. "Just see those fellows pull! Isn't it
grand?" he added enthusiastically. "I'd like to be in that shell
myself," and he turned suddenly, to catch the girl beside him casting
her eyes in his direction. She dropped them quickly, but her whole
manner showed that she, too, was interested, not only in the race, but
in what Jack had said. The cadets, of course, were in uniform, so the
girl knew they were from Colby Hall.

The reel of current events had almost come to a finish, and there was
intense silence as the picture showed the funeral of some well-known
man of the East, when there came a sudden splutter from the operator's
booth in the back gallery. This was followed by several flashes of
light and then a small explosion.

"What's that?"

"Some explosion!"

"The theater's on fire!"

"Let's get out of this!"

"That's right! I don't want to be burnt to death!"

Such were some of the exclamations which arose on the air. A panic had
seized the audience, and, like one person, they leaped to their feet
and began to fight to get out of the theater. In a twinkling there was
a crush in the aisles, and several people came close to being knocked
down and trampled upon.

"Where's my hat?"

"Get back there--don't crush these children!"

"See the smoke pouring in!"

"Open the side door, somebody!"

"Keep cool! Keep cool!" yelled somebody from the gallery. "There is no
fire! Keep cool!" But there was such a tumult below that scarcely
anybody paid attention to these words.

While many fought to get out the way they had come in, others stormed
towards the side doors of the playhouse. Meanwhile, an ill-smelling
cloud of smoke drifted through the auditorium.

With the first alarm the Rover boys had leaped to their feet, and
almost by instinct the others looked to Jack to see what he would do.

"Oh, oh! is the place on fire?" cried the girl who had been sitting
next to the oldest Rover, and she caught him by the arm.

"I don't know," he answered. "Something exploded in the operating
room."

"Oh, let us get out!" came from one of the other girls.

"Yes, yes! I don't want to be burnt up!" wailed a third.

"Don't get excited," warned Jack. "I don't believe there is any great
danger. There is no fire down here, and there seem to be plenty of
doors."

"The fellow upstairs said to keep cool," put in Randy. "Maybe it won't
amount to much after all."

Most of the lights had gone out, leaving the theater in almost total
darkness.

"Come on for the side door," said Jack. "That's the nearest way out."

The smoke from above was now settling, and this caused many to cough,
while it made seeing more difficult than ever. Jack pushed Fred ahead
of him, holding one hand on his cousin's shoulder, while with the other
hand he reached out and grasped the wrist of the girl who had been
sitting beside him.

"You had better come this way," he said; "and bring your friends
along."

"All right. But do hurry!" she pleaded. "I am so afraid that something
will happen."

"Oh, Ruth! can we get out?" questioned the girl next to her.

"I don't know. I hope so," answered the girl addressed, and then began
to cough slightly, for the smoke was steadily growing thicker.

It was no easy matter to reach the side entrance, for already half a
hundred people were striving to get through a doorway not much over two
feet wide. The air was filled with screams and exclamations of protest,
and for the time being in the theater it was as if bedlam had broken
loose.

"Are we all here?" came from Andy, as, with smarting eyes, he tried to
pierce the gloom.

"I'm here," answered his twin.

"So am I," came simultaneously from Jack and Fred.

Then Jack turned to the girl who was now beside him.

"Are all your friends with you?"

"I--I think so," she faltered; and then she added: "Annie, are Alice
and Jennie with you?"

"Yes. We're all here," came from somebody in the rear. "But, oh, do let
us get out! I can scarcely breathe!"

"I've lost my hat!" wailed another.

"Oh, never mind your hat, Alice, as long as we get out," came from the
girl who was next to Jack.

At last the crowd at the doorway thinned out, and a moment later the
four Rovers, pushing the girls ahead of them, managed to get outside.
They found themselves in a narrow alleyway, and from this hurried to
the street beyond.

"Oh, how glad I am that we are out of there!" exclaimed the girl who
had been sitting beside Jack.

"I'm glad myself," he added, wiping away the tears which the smoke had
started from his eyes.

"If only they all get out safely!" said one of the other girls.

"I don't know about that," answered Randy, seriously. "It was a bad
enough crush at that side door, but I think it was worse at the front
doors."

By this time everybody seemed to be out of the theater. An alarm of
fire had been sounded, and now a local chemical engine, followed by a
hook and ladder company, came rushing to the scene. There was, for
fully ten minutes, a good deal of excitement, but this presently died
down when it was learned positively that there was no fire outside the
metallic booth from which the pictures had been shown and where the
small explosion had occurred.

"It wasn't much of an explosion," explained the manager of the theater.
"It was more smoke than anything else."

"Yes. And I yelled to the crowd that there was no fire and that they
must keep cool," added the man who had been operating the moving
picture machine.

In the excitement several people had been knocked down, but fortunately
nobody had been hurt. A number of articles of wearing apparel had been
left in the theater.

"I wish I could get my hat," said the girl named Alice, wistfully. "I
don't want to go back to school bareheaded."

"What kind of a hat was it?" questioned Randy, who stood beside her.
"Maybe I can get it for you;" and then, after the girl had given him a
description of the head covering, he went off to question one of the
theater men about it. In a few minutes more he came back with the
missing property.

After Randy returned, the boys introduced themselves to the girls, and
learned that all of the latter were scholars at Clearwater Hall. The
leader of the party was Ruth Stevenson, who had sat next to Jack, while
her friends were Annie Larkins, Alice Strobell, Jennie Mason and May
Powell.

"I know a fellow named Powell quite well," remarked Jack, as the
last-named girl was introduced. "He goes to our school. His name is
Dick, but we all call him Spouter."

"Dick Powell is my cousin," answered May. And then she added smilingly:
"I've heard of you Rover boys before."

"Yes, and I've heard of you, too," broke in Ruth Stevenson.

"And who told you about us?" questioned Jack.

"Why, a big boy at your school--the head of the football team."

"Oh! do you know Gif Garrison?"

"Yes. I suppose you know him quite well?"

"Well, I should say so!" declared Jack. "Why, my cousin Fred here is
named after Gif Garrison's father. His father and my father were school
chums."

"Oh! Why then we know a lot of the same people, don't we? How nice!"
returned Ruth Stevenson, and smiled frankly at Jack.

After that the talk between the boys and the girls became general, and
each crowd told the other of how matters were going at their own
particular school.

"Yes, I've been up to Colby Hall several times to see the baseball and
the football games," said Ruth to Jack in answer to his question. "It's
certainly a splendid place."

"Some day, if you don't mind, I'll come over and take a look at
Clearwater Hall," he answered.

"Clearwater Hall! Say, that must be a fine place to get a drink!" piped
in Andy; and at this little joke all of the girls giggled.




CHAPTER XVII

THE GIRLS FROM CLEARWATER HALL


The Rover boys remained with the girls from Clearwater Hall for the
best part of half an hour after the scare at the moving picture
theater, and during that time the young folks became quite well
acquainted.

"We'll have to be getting back to our school now," said Ruth Stevenson,
presently.

"Oh, what's your hurry?" pleaded Jack. "Weren't you going to stay to
the pictures?"

"No. We were going to leave immediately after that reel they were
showing when the explosion occurred," the girl replied.

"Well, we've got to get back to Colby Hall in time for supper; but we
can make that easily enough--we are all good walkers."

"I should think you would ride in your auto-stage," put in Alice
Strobell. "I'd ride if we had a stage handy."

"The stage isn't down here now," answered Randy. "It only comes on
order."

The four boys walked with the girls to the end of a side street of the
town, and there the pupils from Clearwater Hall stopped to say
good-bye.

"We are very thankful for what you did for us at the theater," said
Ruth Stevenson. "You were very kind, indeed."

"You are regular heroes!" burst out May Powell, who by her merry eyes
showed that she was almost as full of fun as were the Rover twins. "I'm
going to write to Spouter and let him know all about it."

"And don't forget to mention the rescue of my hat," added Alice
Strobell with a giggle.

"I hope I have the pleasure of meeting you again, Miss Stevenson," said
Jack, in an aside to the oldest girl of the party.

"Well, maybe," she returned, looking at him frankly.

"I've enjoyed this afternoon very much--in spite of that excitement."

"Oh, so have I!" and now she cast down her eyes while a faint flush
stole into her cheeks.

"We won't dare say much about that trouble in the theater when we get
back to school," remarked Jennie Mason.

"That's right!" burst out Annie Larkins. "If we did, maybe Miss Garwood
would refuse to let us attend any more performances."

"Is Miss Garwood the head of your school?" questioned Randy.

"Yes. And let me tell you, she is a very particular and precise woman."

"I guess she isn't as precise and particular as one of our professors,"
was Andy's comment.

"Oh! do you mean that teacher they call old Lemon?" cried May Powell.

"Yes."

"We've met him a number of times. What a ridiculous man he is! I don't
understand why Colonel Colby keeps him."

"I saw you look at me when I spoke about that boat race," said Jack to
Ruth Stevenson. "Maybe you like to be out on the water?"

"Oh, I do--very much! You know we have boats at the school, and I often
go out with my friends."

"I like to row myself. Perhaps some day you'd like to go out with me?"
went on the oldest Rover, boldly.

"I'd have to ask permission first," answered the girl, and then dropped
her eyes. Evidently, however, the tentative invitation pleased her.

As was to be expected, the parting between the boys and the girls was a
rather prolonged affair, and it looked as if everybody was highly
pleased with everybody else. But at last Annie Larkins looked at a
wrist watch she wore and gave a little shriek.

"Oh, girls, we must be going! We ought to be at the school this
minute!"

"Then here is where we start the walking act," declared May Powell.
"Good-bye, everybody!" and away she hurried, leaving the others to
trail behind her.

"Don't forget about the row," said Jack in a low tone to Ruth
Stevenson.

"I'll remember--if I get the chance," she returned; and in a moment
more all of the girls were gone and the boys retraced their steps to
the center of the town.

"Pretty nice bunch," was Randy's comment.

"It's funny that Spouter Powell never told us he had such a nice
cousin," came from Fred.

"Hello, Fred's already smitten!" cried Jack, gaily.

"Huh! you needn't talk," retorted the youngest Rover. "How about
yourself? Didn't I catch you trying to make a date with that Ruth
Stevenson?"

"Oh, say, Fred! your ears are too big for your head," retorted Jack,
growing red, while Andy and Randy looked at each other suggestively.

By this time the excitement around the moving picture theater had died
away completely and the crowd had disappeared. The front doors were
closed, but the manager was just hanging out a sign to the effect that
the evening performances would be given as usual.

"I guess it was a big scare for nothing," was Randy's comment.

"The audience can be thankful that they got out without anybody being
hurt," returned Jack.

The boys made a few more purchases in Haven Point, and then started
back for Colby Hall.

"I wonder if those girls go to church in Haven Point on Sundays,"
remarked Jack, just before the Hall was reached.

"I don't know," answered Andy. "More than likely." His eyes began to
twinkle. "Thinking of going to church yourself, Jack?"

"Didn't we go to church when we were at home, Andy?"

"Sure," was the prompt reply.

"I think we can find out from Spouter or from some of the other
cadets," answered Fred. "I know the boys are allowed to go to whatever
church they please on Sundays." It may be as well to add here that on
week days regular chapel exercises were held at Colby Hall before the
ordinary classes were in session.

From Spouter Jack received the information he desired, which was to the
effect that his cousin May and a number of her chums generally attended
a church on the outskirts of Haven Point in the direction of Clearwater
Hall.

"If you say so, I'll go with you there to-morrow morning," continued
Spouter; and so the matter was arranged. At the church the cadets heard
a very good sermon, and after the services had the pleasure of
strolling with the girls as far as the entrance to their school
grounds.

Monday morning found the Rovers once more down to the grind of lessons.
So far they had gotten along very well. But on Tuesday the unfortunate
Andy had another run-in with Asa Lemm.

"This won't do at all, Rover," stormed the professor, after Andy had
given the wrong answer to a question. "You must pay more attention to
your studies."

"I'm doing the best I can, Professor," pleaded the youth.

"Nonsense! I don't believe a word of it. They tell me you spend most of
your time in horseplay. Now, that won't do at all. You must buckle down
to your studies or I shall have to take you in hand;" and Professor
Lemm glared at the lad as if ready to devour him.

"Say, Andy, you'll have to toe the chalk mark after this," whispered
his twin. "If you----"

"Silence there! I will have silence!" cried Asa Lemm, pounding on his
desk with a paper weight.

"I'll have one grand smash-up with that man some day," was Andy's
comment in speaking of the affair after the school session had closed.
"I can't stand his arbitrary ways."

"Oh, he's a lemon--and worse," returned his brother.

During that week there was an election of officers for the school
battalion, composed of Company A and Company B. The Rover boys, being
freshmen, could not compete for any position, even had they so desired;
but there was a good deal of electioneering among the cadets, and the
lads got quite a lot of fun out of it. The announcement of who was
elected was followed by a parade around the grounds and an unusually
good supper in the mess hall. Then the boys were allowed to gather at
one end of the parade ground near the river, where they soon had
several large bonfires burning, around which they danced, sang, and cut
up to their hearts' content.

The election had been a bitter disappointment to Slugger Brown and
Nappy Martell. Each had wanted to be an officer of the battalion, and
each had failed to get the required number of votes.

"It's that Gif Garrison-Spouter Powell crowd that did it," muttered
Slugger Brown. "I saw 'em working like troopers to defeat us."

"Yes. And those Rover boys worked against both of you, too," piped in
Codfish, who was present. "I watched 'em do it. They went all around
among the fellows they know electioneering for the others who were
running."

"It would be just like them to do it," muttered Nappy Martell,
gloomily.

"I thought you were going to fight that Jack Rover to a finish some
day?" questioned the sneak of the school.

"So I am--when I get the chance," returned Martell.

As soon as the election of officers was settled, the minds of a certain
number of cadets turned to football. Gif Garrison was busy arranging
his teams and placing the names of the players up on a big board in the
gymnasium.

"Hurrah!" shouted Fred, bursting in on Jack one afternoon while the
latter was busy in his room studying the next day's lessons. "Our names
are up on the board, Jack! Gif has put us up for a try-out on the scrub
eleven!"

"Is that so!" exclaimed his cousin, his face showing his satisfaction.
"Are you sure?"

"I am. I just came from the gymnasium. We are to report for practice
to-morrow afternoon at four o'clock."

"Is Andy or Randy up?"

"No. You remember they told Gif they didn't want to play football this
season."

The Rover boys soon learned that not only Gif but also Spouter, Ned
Lowe, Walt Baxter, and Slugger Brown were on the regular eleven. The
scrub team was made up largely from the freshmen class, although Dan
Soppinger and a few others of the older cadets who had never played on
the first team were also included.

"Now, I want all of you to do your very best," said Gif, at the close
of a long talk to the boys on what was required of them. "We'll have
nothing but squad work first, and then a game or two just to find out
how matters are shaping themselves."

As an aid Gif had Mr. Crews, the gymnasium instructor, who in his
younger days had been quite a football player. Between the pair matters
took shape rapidly, and by the end of the week the scrub was in shape
to play a game against the regulars.

As was to be expected, this opening contest was a decidedly ragged one,
even the regular team making many plays which caused hearty laughter.

"You fellows have all got to do better if we want to win any matches,"
declared Gif. "Now then, go at it as if you meant it and see that you
mind the rules." And after that the playing showed gradual improvement.

Colonel Colby had not forgotten his own football days, and one
afternoon he came down to the field to see what progress his pupils
were making.

"Be on the alert when the signals are given," he said. "The signals,"
he added, "count for a good deal."

With the master of the school present, the cadets put forth renewed
efforts and the playing became actually snappy. There were several
well-earned runs, and once Jack managed to kick a goal from the field
which brought forth considerable applause.

"Keep it up, Jack! You're doing fine!" were Gif's encouraging words.

"Thanks. I'll do the best I know how," was the rejoinder.

Fred was also working hard, and a little later he made a run which
netted the scrub team fifteen yards.

"Fine! Fine!" cried his cousin encouragingly.

"That was well played," announced Gif. "But I want every man on the
field to do better than he has been doing," he added, stiffening up,
for he knew that a captain can only get out of his men the best that is
in them by thus urging them on.

During several of the plays Jack had come into contact with Slugger
Brown, and the big fellow showed that he had no friendly feeling for
the Rover boy.

"You be careful," warned Jack, when Brown started once to tackle him
unfairly. But the big fellow merely grinned in a sarcastic fashion.
Then, less than two minutes later and while there was a wild rush on,
Slugger Brown, by a sidelong and unexpected leap, hurled Jack to the
ground and spiked him in the leg with his shoe.




CHAPTER XVIII

SLUGGER BROWN IS EXPOSED


To be thrown down so violently was bad enough, but to be spiked in the
leg hurt so much that Jack could not repress a gasp of pain.

"Get off of me, Brown!" he panted when he could speak. "What do you
mean by spiking me that way?"

"Didn't spike you!" retorted Slugger Brown, scowling viciously.

The whistle blew and Gif came running towards the pair. "What's the
matter?" he demanded.

"Brown tackled me unfairly and then spiked me," answered Jack.

"It's false!" roared the accused one. "I threw him down according to
the rules and I didn't spike him at all!"

The pain in Jack's leg was so intense that he could hardly stand. Fred
and some others came rushing to his assistance, and between them he
managed to hobble to a bench at the side of the football field. A crowd
began to collect, and all wanted to know what had gone wrong.

"Let us take a look at your leg, Rover," said Mr. Crews. "That will
show whether you were spiked or not." The limb was exposed, and then a
cry of dismay went up.

"Why, look there--it's all bloody! Slugger Brown must have spiked him
for keeps!"

"That's a shame--if he did it on purpose. He has no right to have
spikes in his shoes."

"I didn't do it on purpose! It was an accident!" cried the accused
player. "I didn't know I had spiked him or that I had spikes. Maybe he
cut himself on a stone or something like that."

"No; he has been spiked," announced the gymnasium instructor, after
examining the wound. "Come, Rover; we'll go to the gymnasium and I'll
attend to that and bind it up for you."

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Brown, for doing such a thing to
my cousin," said Fred.

"That's right!" broke in Randy, who had come up.

"You stop your talking!" answered Slugger Brown, uneasily. "It was an
accident, I tell you. Anybody on the team might have done it."

Colonel Colby had been on the other side of the field, but now he came
hurrying forward to see what was amiss. He told Mr. Crews to do
everything that was necessary for Jack, and then turned to Gif.

"I think it would be as well for you to retire Brown for the present,"
he said in a low voice.

"Just what I was going to do," answered the football captain quickly.
"We'll have to investigate this matter after the game is over."

"I don't see why I should be put off the team!" cried Slugger Brown,
when notified that a substitute would take his place. "It was an
accident and nothing else."

"We'll see about that later, Brown," answered Gif briefly. "Anyway, you
had no right to have spikes on your shoes."

With one substitute in place of Brown and another playing Jack's
position, the game went on and came to a finish in favor of the regular
team by a score of 22 to 16.

"Not such a very good showing for the regulars," was Gif's comment.

"Maybe, if Jack had been in shape to play, we might have beaten you,"
remarked Fred, grimly.

"Oh, I'm not willing to admit that," answered the football captain.
"Just the same, some of you fellows on the scrub did very well, indeed.
I'm going to continue to keep my eyes on all of you."

Down in the gymnasium the wound inflicted by the spikes in Slugger
Brown's shoe had been carefully washed and dressed by Mr. Crews and
then bandaged.

"I don't think you'll have any great trouble from it, Rover," remarked
the gymnasium instructor. "But, just the same, you had better favor
that leg for a few days."

"Then you wouldn't advise me to play football?" questioned Jack in
dismay.

"Not for the next few days. After that I think you'll be all right."

As soon as the game was over, Gif, aided by Mr. Crews, began an
investigation, closely questioning all of the players and those looking
on who had seen the encounter between Brown and Jack. Of course, there
were various versions of the affair, but the consensus of opinions
seemed to be that the tackle had been an unfair one and that Brown
could have avoided spiking Jack had he been more careful. It was
likewise considered unfair to use spiked shoes even in a practice game.

"I guess he did it just to be nasty," said Gif to Mr. Crews. "You see,
he and Nappy Martell and that crowd are all down on the Rovers."

"I know nothing about the quarrels between the cadets," was Mr. Crews'
reply. "But I do know that spiking anyone on purpose cannot be
permitted in this institution. I recommend, Garrison, that Brown be
suspended from the team."

This was going a little further than Gif had anticipated. He knew that
Brown was a fairly good player, carrying considerable weight, and that
the cadet's heart would be almost broken if he was taken out of the
games entirely.

"Don't you think, Mr. Crews, it would be going far enough if I put him
on the bench with the substitutes?" he pleaded. "To be thrown out of
the team entirely is a terrible blow for any one."

"But we expect our cadets to act like young gentlemen and not like
brutes, Garrison," returned the gymnastic instructor warmly. "However,
if you wish to place Brown among the substitutes, I will not oppose
you. His weight might help you to win some game if it was running very
close and some of your best players dropped out." And so it was
arranged.

Slugger Brown had been very anxious to know what the outcome of the
matter would be. He was far from appeased when he received the
notification that, while he would be retained on the regular team, it
would be only as a substitute.

"A substitute, eh?" he said sarcastically to Gif. "So that is the way
you are going to punish me for something that couldn't be helped."

"Mr. Crews and I went into the details of the affair, Brown," answered
the football captain. "Mr. Crews wanted to put you off the team
entirely. It was only through my efforts that you are to remain as a
substitute."

"I've been the mainstay of our football eleven ever since it was
organized!" stormed Slugger Brown. "I helped to win every victory that
came our way."

"I'm not denying that you play well. But, just the same, if you'll
remember, you've been warned of your brutal attacks before. In that
game with Hixley High last Fall, the left tackle said, if you will
remember, that you ought to be handed over to the police. Now Mr. Crews
says--and I agree with him--that we've got to play in a clean-cut
fashion, free from all needless brutality."

"Bah! I won't listen to you," howled Slugger Brown. "You're in with
those Rovers, and that whole crowd is down on me just because I am
chummy with Nappy Martell. I won't stand for it! If I can't play on the
regular team, I won't play at all!"

"Very well then, you can suit yourself about that," answered Gif; and
to avoid further argument he walked away, leaving the big youth in
anything but a pleasant frame of mind.

The interview had taken place in the gymnasium, and presently Slugger
Brown was joined by Nappy Martell and three or four other cronies,
including Codfish.

"It's an outrage!" was Martell's comment, when Slugger had told of what
had occurred. "I wouldn't stand for it! No wonder you told him you
wouldn't play on the eleven any more."

"A team that has got a captain like that doesn't deserve to win," was
the comment of one of the other cadets.

"Say, Slugger, why don't you get to work and see if you can't boost Gif
Garrison out of his place? He has no more right to be captain of the
eleven than you have."

"Easy enough to say," growled Brown. "But Garrison has too many of the
fellows under his thumb. Oh, I don't care--they can go to grass with
their old football games!" And then Slugger Brown stalked off by
himself to nurse his wrath as best he could. He was very bitter against
Jack.

"It's all that Rover boy's fault," he muttered to himself. "I don't
wonder Nappy is down on that crowd."

The recent cold snap had given way to weather that was quite balmy;
and, being unable to put in his off time in football practice, Jack
remembered what he had said to Ruth Stevenson about a row on the river.
He consulted with Fred, and then the pair managed to get a message to
both Ruth and May Powell; and in return received word that the two
girls would be pleased to go out the following afternoon about four
o'clock.

"Gee! you fellows will have a dandy time," remarked Randy, when he
heard of this. "Why didn't you let us know?"

"Four in one of those rowboats is about enough," answered Jack. "But if
you and Andy want to go out, why don't you get another boat and send
word to a couple of the other girls?"

"All right! Let's do it," answered Andy, quickly; and the upshot of the
matter was that they telephoned over to Clearwater Hall and made an
arrangement with Alice Strobell and Annie Larkins.

"It's a shame we can't ask Jennie Mason, too," said Randy, who
remembered the fifth girl who had been in the crowd at the moving
picture theater.

"You won't have to worry about Jennie," answered Alice Strobell, over
the telephone. "She has a date with somebody else."

The Rover boys had already arranged about the boats, and promptly on
time they set off down the river in the direction of the lake. They had
to row past the several docks of the town, and then drew up at a small
wharf, leading up to the Clearwater Hall grounds.

When the girls appeared, they were accompanied by one of the teachers,
who had been sent down, evidently, for the purpose of looking the
cadets over.

"Now remember, do not stay out any later than six o'clock," said the
teacher, as the girls were entering the two rowboats, assisted by the
boys.

"Oh, we'll have to come back a little before that time," answered Jack.
"You see, we are due at Colby Hall at that hour."

"Very well then," said the teacher. "I trust you all have a pleasant
time," and she smiled.

"Oh, we'll have a good time--don't worry," sang out Andy, gaily.

"To be sure we will," echoed May Powell.

And then, with the girls safely seated in the two rowboats, the boys
took up the oars, and the little outing on Clearwater Lake was begun.




CHAPTER XIX

A SQUALL ON THE LAKE


"It's too bad we don't happen to have a motor boat up here," remarked
Jack, as he and Fred bent to the oars of their rowboat.

"You mustn't work too hard," came from Ruth.

"I wasn't thinking of that," answered the oldest Rover boy quickly. "I
was only thinking if we had a motor boat we could go farther."

"They are going to have a motor boat or two at Colby Hall next
Spring--I heard Colonel Colby speaking about it," put in Fred.

"That will be very fine," remarked May. "I suppose you'll give us a
ride once in a while?" she added, her eyes twinkling.

"Sure!" responded the youngest Rover, quickly.

"Hi--over there!" came from Andy, as he and his twin bent to the oars.
"Want to race?"

"Of course--if you'd like to!" responded Jack.

"Oh, a race!" exclaimed Alice Strobell. "Won't that be fine!"

"There won't be any danger, will there?" questioned Annie Larkins,
anxiously.

"No danger whatever, so long as we keep far enough apart," answered
Randy. "And we'll do that, because we expect to leave them far behind."

"Not much you won't leave us behind!" retorted Fred. And then he added:
"Are you ready?"

"Wait a minute until we have the young ladies seated just right,"
answered Andy. And then, turning to the two girls in the boat with him,
he continued gaily: "Now sit right in the center of the boat, please;
and be sure to have your hair parted exactly in the middle;" and at
this both girls shrieked with laughter.

With their passengers seated to their satisfaction, the four Rovers
prepared for the race.

"Where are we going to race to?" questioned Jack.

"I don't know," answered Randy. "Can any of you tell me?" he went on,
appealing to the pupils from Clearwater Hall.

"You might race to the near end of Foxtail Island," suggested Ruth, and
pointed to an island some distance down the lake.

"That suits!" cried Jack.

"The first one to reach the dock at the end of the island wins the
race," announced May.

"And what's the prize?" questioned Fred.

"Oh, the prize will be the pleasure of rowing back," answered May, and
at this little joke there was a general laugh.

"Now please don't tip us overboard," pleaded Alice.

"Nary a tip," answered Randy.

"We're not looking for tips," broke in Andy, quickly. "We are going to
do this free, gratis, for nothing," and at this pun there was another
laugh. Then Jack gave the signal, and away the two rowboats started on
the race.

Of course, it was only a friendly affair, and none of the boys rowed as
hard as he would have done in a regular contest. Nevertheless, each
craft made good progress over the sparkling waters of the lake.

"Oh, my! you certainly can row," remarked Ruth to Jack and Fred, as
their craft drew ahead.

"Oh, we're not warmed up yet," was Jack's reply.

"We could do much better if we were in regular rowing togs," explained
Fred.

"Hi you! What do you mean by going ahead?" piped out Randy. "Come on,
Andy, or they'll beat us."

"Maybe they can beat a drum, but they can't beat us," cried Andy.

And then he and his twin increased their strokes so that presently
their boat was once more beside the other.

The girls were as much interested as the boys in the impromptu race,
and they soon began to shout words of encouragement.

"Pull! pull! we're going to win!" cried May.

"Not a bit of it! Our boat will get there first!" sang out Alice.

"You can't beat us!" came from Annie.

"He crows best who crows last," cried Ruth.

"Right you are!" came pantingly from Jack; and then, as he saw the look
of encouragement in Ruth's face, he redoubled his efforts. Fred did the
same, and when they came into plain view of the tiny dock at the end of
Foxtail Island their boat was two full lengths ahead of the other.

"Hi you! What kind of a race is this, anyhow?" shouted out Andy, gaily.
"Why don't you keep side by side and be sociable?"

"Sour grapes!" roared Fred. "Here is where we win!" and in a moment
more he and Jack sent their boat up to the side of the little dock.
Almost immediately the second craft followed.

"I think all of you did very well," remarked Ruth, consolingly.

"Anyway, we came in a close second," remarked Randy.

"We would have won if it hadn't been for one thing--just one thing,"
remarked Andy, solemnly.

"Why, what was that?" questioned several of the others quickly.

"That was the fact that the other boat"--Andy drew a deep breath--"came
in first." At this the girls shrieked with laughter and the other boys
set up a howl.

"Pitch him into the lake!"

"That's right! Give him a bath!"

"A ducking will do him good--he needs to be cooled off!"

"Not much! No bath for me!" cried Andy, quickly, and lost no time in
leaping to the dock, where, in the exuberance of his spirits, he turned
several handsprings, much to the amusement of the girls.

"Is there anything worth seeing on this island?" questioned Jack, when
the excitement of the race was over.

"There isn't anything here that I know of," answered Ruth. "In the
summer time people come here to picnic. There is a nice spring of water
in the center of the island."

"Let's go and get a drink," said Fred. "That race made me thirsty;" and
off the whole party trooped to the spring.

The young folks had a good time at the spring and in exploring the
little island, which had a hill at one end covered with trees. They
found some chestnuts and also a few hickory nuts, and these the boys
opened for the girls' benefit.

"I suppose we had better go on and finish the row," remarked Jack to
Ruth, presently. "That is, unless you girls would rather wander through
the woods."

"Oh, it's nice enough here on the island," she answered. "Remember,
you'll have quite a row back to the school and then to Colby Hall."

"Oh, let's stay here for a while," put in Alice. "Maybe we'll be able
to find more nuts."

They hunted around, and presently discovered another large chestnut
tree which was fairly loaded. The boys threw up sticks and stones, and
brought down a big shower.

"If I had known this, we might have brought along a pillowcase for the
nuts," said Fred.

"We can come back some day if we want to," returned Randy.

Before leaving the island the young folks decided to go back to where
the spring was located, so as to get another drink and also to wash
their hands. On this trip, in speaking about the excitement at the
moving picture theater, Randy chanced to mention Jennie Mason's name.

"Jennie is a nice girl," answered Annie Larkins, to whom he was
speaking, "but she does some things that I do not approve of. Do you
know a cadet at your Hall named Napoleon Martell--I think they call him
Nappy for short?"

"Do we know him!" exclaimed Randy. "I should say we did!"

"Oh! is that so?" Annie looked at him searchingly. "Is he a friend of
yours?"

"No; I can't say that he is. To tell you the truth, he doesn't like us
at all."

"If that's the case, I don't mind speaking to you about Jennie," went
on the girl. "You know, Jennie comes from New York City. And down there
she met Nappy Martell quite a few times, and they became well
acquainted. But Jennie's folks don't approve of him at all; and they
don't want her to go with him." And here Annie paused.

"And do you mean to say she does go with him, anyhow?" queried the
Rover boy.

"Yes. She goes out to meet him whenever she can get the chance," was
the reply. "You are sure you don't approve of him?"

"Not in the least. In fact, to tell the truth, we have no use for him
or the bunch he trains with."

"I see. Well, all of us think it is perfectly dreadful the way Jennie
accepts Martell's invitations. Of course, we don't want to tell on her,
either in school or to her folks, and yet none of us think it is
right."

"Does he take her out much?"

"Oh, as much as they dare to go. He takes her out sailing on the lake
and to the moving picture shows, and once they went off together on a
picnic to the Clearwater Country Club. The places were all right in
themselves, but I know Jennie's folks don't want her to be seen in the
company of Nappy Martell. He is so loud and forward."

"You can't tell us anything about Martell being loud and forward,"
answered Randy, readily. "We all know him to be a regular bully.
Besides that, when he isn't in uniform, he wears the loudest kind of
clothes--just as if he wanted to make an exhibition of himself."

"Jennie went out with him this afternoon," continued Annie. "Where they
went to, I do not know. But I think they hired a motor boat and went
across the lake."

"Does Martell know how to run a motor boat?"

"Oh, yes. He told Jennie that he owned a motor boat on the Hudson
River--a boat his father gave him for a birthday present."

Randy and the girl had dropped a little behind the others, who now
waited for them to come up.

"I think we had better be getting back," said Jack. "It isn't as clear
as it was before, and it is beginning to blow."

"Yes, we'll get back," returned Randy, with a look at the sky. He knew
that a blow on the lake might be no trifling matter.

On the way over to the island the sun had been clear and warm. Now,
however, it was hidden under a dark bank of clouds, which were coming
up quickly from the west. The wind was already blowing freely, and out
on the bosom of the lake the water was roughing up in tiny ripples.

"All aboard, everybody!" sang out Jack. And then turning to his cousins
he added in a low voice: "We mustn't lose a minute of time in getting
back. This blow is going to be a heavy one."

The girls were soon seated in the rowboats, and then the four Rovers
lost no time in casting off from the little dock and in starting to row
towards Clearwater Hall. As they proceeded, the sky kept growing darker
and darker while the wind grew stronger and stronger.

"We're in for a squall all right enough," murmured Randy, as he and
Andy bent to their oars with vigor.

"Gee! I only hope we can reach the shore before it strikes us," was the
response.

"Row for all you're worth, boys!" sang out Jack from the other boat.
"Bend to it just as if you were in a race!"

And then he and Fred, as well as the twins, settled down to the task of
trying to outrace the oncoming squall.




CHAPTER XX

IN GREAT PERIL


As those who have had any experience know, a squall on a lake encircled
by hills sometimes comes up very quickly, and this is what happened in
the present case. Hardly had the two rowboats covered a quarter of the
distance to the shore, when the wind came whistling across the bosom of
the lake, sending the whitecaps tumbling in all directions.

"Oh, dear, just look how rough the water is getting!" remarked Ruth in
alarm.

"And how the wind is blowing!" added May.

In the other boat the girls were even more fearful, and Andy and Randy
had all they could do to make them sit still.

"Don't shift," pleaded Randy. "We don't want to ship any water."

"Oh, dear! If only we were safe on shore!" wailed Alice.

"I didn't think it looked like a storm when we left the school," added
Annie, in dismay.

"This is only a squall. It may blow itself out in a few minutes,"
returned Randy, although to himself he admitted that the squall looked
as though it might last for some time.

Battling as best they could against the wind and the whitecaps, the
Rover boys strove to reach the shore in the vicinity of the girls'
school. But the wind was blowing directly down Clearwater Lake and
threatened more than once to capsize them.

"Gee, Jack, this is getting serious!" panted Fred, as he looked
questioningly at his cousin.

The same thought had come into the minds of each of the boys. Could the
girls swim? They wished they knew, but did not dare to ask any
questions for fear of further alarming their passengers.

"I guess we had better head up into the wind. It's the safest thing to
do," cried Jack. And then, raising his voice to be heard above the
whistling of the elements, he added: "Head up! Don't take those waves
sideways! Head up!"

The others understood, and in a minute more both of the boats were
heading directly into the wind. This prevented either of the craft from
swamping, but caused the spray to hit the bow more than once, sending a
shower of water over everybody.

"Oh, dear! I'm getting wet!" wailed May.

"Do you think you can reach shore?" questioned Ruth of Jack; and her
wide-open eyes showed her terror.

"We can't head for the school just now," he answered. "We'll have to
keep pulling up against the wind until it lets up a little."

"Oh, but we sha'n't upset, shall we?" came from Spouter Powell's
cousin.

"I don't think so. Anyway, we are going to do our best to prevent it,"
answered Fred.

Keeping as close together as they dared, the two rowboats continued to
head up into the wind, which still blew as hard as ever. In the sky the
clouds were shifting, and Jack and his cousins had great hopes that ere
long the sudden squall would blow itself out.

"Here comes a motor boat up behind us!" cried Ruth, presently.

All looked in that direction and saw a fair-sized craft coming up the
lake. She was making good speed in spite of the whitecaps, and was
sending the spray flying in all directions.

"I think that is the boat Jennie Mason was going out in," remarked
Annie to Randy. "Yes; I am sure it is," she added a minute later, as
the motor boat came closer. "There is Mr. Martell at the wheel now."

The discovery that Nappy Martell was running the oncoming motor boat
had also been made by those occupying the other rowboat.

"It's Martell! And there is Slugger Brown with him!" cried Fred.

"Isn't one of those girls Miss Mason?" questioned Jack.

"Yes. And Ida Brierley, one of our girls, is with her," answered Ruth.
Her manner indicated that the discovery did not altogether please her.

"Maybe we can get that motor boat to pull us in," suggested May. "They
could do it easily enough."

"So they could," answered Fred. "But I doubt if those two fellows who
are running it would like to undertake the job. They go to Colby Hall,
but they are no friends of ours."

"Yes, but they ought not to let their enmity stand between us in a time
like this," said Jack. "If they were in the rowboats and I was in the
motor boat, I'd give them help quick enough."

As the motor boat drew nearer, it prepared to pass close to the craft
manned by Jack and Fred. As it came closer, Jennie Mason gave a cry of
surprise.

"Oh, look! look! There are those Rover boys, and some of our girls are
with them!"

"I'm glad I am not out in a rowboat," said Ida Brierley. "I'd be afraid
of getting a good ducking."

"Ahoy there, on the motor boat!" sang out Fred, as the craft came
alongside. "Can't you fellows give us a tow? We have plenty of rope."

"This motor boat wasn't built for towing," answered Nappy Martell,
roughly.

"We're having a terrible time of it against this wind," put in Jack. He
would not have asked for assistance on his own account, but he was
thinking of the girls. He knew that all of them were badly frightened.

"Oh, yes! please tow us in!" came from May.

"Yes! please do!" added Ruth.

"It's so far to the shore!" came from Annie.

"And we're afraid we'll get wet through and through!" cried Alice.

"You ought to do something for them," declared Jennie Mason, who had
herself become frightened over the roughness of the lake.

"I'm not going to tow those Rovers in," muttered Nappy Martell. "You
wouldn't do it, would you, Slugger?"

"Not much! Let 'em take care of themselves," was the heartless answer.

"Oh! but they may be drowned!" gasped Jennie.

"Nothing of the sort. This is only a little wind, and it will soon die
down. If those Rovers have to break their backs rowing, it will do 'em
good!"

"If you don't tow us in, you'll be the meanest fellow on earth," sang
out Andy.

"I wouldn't have your disposition for a million dollars," added his
twin.

"Aw! go chase yourselves!" retorted Slugger Brown, heartlessly.

"We're not helping fellows like you," came from Nappy Martell. Then the
motor boat passed on and was soon all but lost in the distance.

"Of all the mean people!" cried Ruth.

"I shouldn't think Jennie Mason would stand for such meanness,"
declared May. "Nor Ida Brierley, either."

The motor boat having gone on and left them to their fate, the Rover
boys continued pulling on the oars. It was hard, laborious work, and
soon Andy and Fred were all but exhausted. Jack and Randy, however, had
now gotten their second wind, so to speak, and they continued their
efforts with unabated vigor.

"It was as mean as dirt for them to leave us out here when they could
have towed us in with ease," panted Fred. "Just you wait--I'll let the
whole school know of this!"

"Don't talk! Save your wind. We can talk afterwards," returned his
cousin.

The next quarter of an hour was one which none of the girls or boys
ever forgot. The Rovers continued to battle with the wind and the waves
with all the energy left to them, while the girls crouched down on the
seats almost speechless with fear. Occasionally, the waves would hit
the bow of one rowboat or the other, sending a shower of water over the
occupants.

"I--think--it's--letting up--a--bit," panted Jack, presently, and
glanced up at the sky.

"Oh, if only it would!" breathed Ruth.

The boat containing the others had dropped slightly behind, but now
Jack and Fred held back until it was once more alongside.

"Oh, did you ever see such a storm!" wailed Alice.

"I don't think I'll ever want to go out in a rowboat again," was
Annie's bitter comment.

"I think the wind is beginning to die down," said Ruth, encouragingly.

"Let--us--hope--so," came in jerks from Jack. He was still rowing, but
his arms felt as if they were being torn from their sockets.

They had now covered nearly half the distance to the upper end of the
lake, but they were just as far from the western shore as ever. Now,
however, as the wind began to die down, they turned slightly in the
direction of Haven Point.

"It won't matter where we land," declared Ruth. "We can easily walk
back to the school."

The sun was still under a cloud, but now the wind went down more than
ever. The surface of the lake, however, was still much troubled, and
the boys had all they could do to make any progress towards the shore.

"Oh, you must be very tired!" said Ruth to Jack.

"Never--mind--we'll--reach--shore--somehow," he answered. Then she said
no more, because she knew it was painful for him to speak.

The four boys continued to row on, and in about a quarter of an hour
came within plain view of the shore, at a point some distance beyond
Clearwater Hall and the town.

"Oh, look! Something is the matter down by the lumber yards," remarked
Alice, presently. "See the men running!" She pointed, and those in both
rowboats looked in that direction.

"I don't see anything wrong," said Ruth.

"I do!" cried May, and gave a little shriek. "Look! look! A whole lot
of lumber is drifting this way!"

"Some--thing--broken--lose," gasped Jack. "Maybe--a--lumber--raft."

And that was just what had happened. In a manner to be explained later,
a lumber raft being towed up the lake by a steam tug had not only
broken away, but likewise had broken apart, and the timbers which had
composed it were now floating around over a large area of Clearwater
Lake.

In another minute the two rowboats were in the very midst of the
drifting timbers and in great danger of being upset.




CHAPTER XXI

ASSISTANCE REFUSED


"My gracious! look at the lumber floating around!"

"Be careful, boys! Don't get hit if you can help it!"

"One of those timbers is heavy enough to send us to the bottom!"

"Oh, dear! Do you think we'll be smashed up?"

Such were some of the cries which rent the air as the Rover boys and
the girls with them found themselves in the midst of the wreckage from
the broken-apart lumber raft.

On all sides of them heavy sticks of timber were bobbing up and down on
the whitecaps, and presently one of these bumped into the craft
occupied by Jack and Fred and two of the girls. The rowboat careened so
much that quite a large quantity of water was shipped, which made Ruth
and May scream in fright.

"Stand up in the bow, Fred, and see if you--can--ward--them--off!"
gasped Jack as well as his semi-exhausted condition would permit. "I'll
stick to--the--oars."

He knew he must keep the rowboat headed up into the wind, for the
squall had not yet subsided sufficiently to allow of their taking it
sidewise.

A moment later came a cry from the other rowboat as the craft slipped
up and over several large sticks of timber.

[Illustration: THE CRAFT SLIPPED UP AND OVER SEVERAL LARGE STICKS
OF TIMBER.
_Page_ 207]

"Gosh! that was a narrow escape!" was Andy's comment, as the craft
finally righted itself.

"Oh, dear! if only we were on shore once more!" wailed Annie, for at
least the tenth time.

"I never dreamed that we would have such a dreadful experience as
this!" came from Alice.

Randy said nothing, but continued to row, while Andy did the same as
Fred was doing, both trying their best to ward off the heavy sticks
which came floating towards them every minute or two.

Not far away was a steam tug, and presently two other boats came from
the shore, both bent upon saving all that was possible of the
broken-apart lumber raft.

"We'll pick you up if you have much trouble," cried the captain of the
steam tug, as he ran a course between the two rowboats. "But don't ask
us to do it unless it's necessary, for we want to round up this
floating lumber before it gets away from us, if it can be done."

"Thank you!" gasped out Jack, in return. "Maybe we
can--make--the--shore. The wind seems--to--be--going--down."

"Sure, we'll make it!" put in Randy. The fright of the girls in his
boat had somewhat nettled him and he was resolved to land them safely
without assistance.

But it was a time of peril as well as exhausting effort; and all of the
Rovers were glad enough when the last of the drifting lumber was passed
and they came within hailing distance of the shore. The wind had now
gone down considerably, and most of this was to be felt farther out on
the lake.

"Let us take them right down to the school dock," sang out Randy. "We
can turn down the lake, and the wind will be just strong enough to help
us;" and so it was arranged.

When the two rowboats came within sight of the school dock, those on
board found fully a dozen of the scholars there, along with two of the
teachers.

"Are you safe?" cried one of the teachers, as soon as the boats came
within hailing distance.

"Yes, Miss Glover. We are all right," answered Ruth.

"Only we are rather wet," added May.

"And I'm awfully glad to get back," broke in Annie, who was fairly
shivering over her trying experience.

"Well, anyway, I think you cadets did perfectly splendid," remarked
Alice.

"Indeed they did!" broke out Ruth, quickly. "I don't believe anyone
could have managed these boats better;" and she bestowed a glance of
admiration first on Jack and then on his cousins.

"It was a terrible blow, and it came up so quickly that we all grew
alarmed for your safety," said Miss Glover.

"And then to think that you must get mixed up with that drifting
lumber!" put in the other teacher. "The squall was bad enough without
having anything like that happen."

"It's too bad the lumbermen had their big raft go apart like that," was
Jack's comment. "I guess those big sticks of timber are worth a good
deal of money."

"They couldn't have had the raft chained together very tightly," said
Miss Glover, who had come from a lumbering community where rafting was
frequent. "I never heard of a raft going to pieces like that."

"Well, I don't know much about lumber rafts," answered Jack.

"Say, can't we leave our two rowboats here and ride back to the Hall?"
questioned Randy. "I don't want to do any more rowing if I can help
it."

"Of course you can leave your boats here," answered Miss Glover, and
she showed where the craft might be stowed away in the boathouse. All
of the Rovers were glad enough to give up further work at the oars.

"I am awfully sorry our little outing turned out as it did," remarked
Jack to Ruth.

"And it was too bad to frighten you so," added Randy, to all of the
girls.

"Oh, it wasn't your fault that the squall came up," answered Ruth.
"And, besides that, now it is over I think I rather enjoyed the
adventure--that is. I'll enjoy telling about it," she corrected.

"Some day I hope we'll be able to spend a nicer time together," said
Jack.

"Perhaps," murmured Ruth, and blushed.

Before the Rovers left for Colby Hall, they asked if Jennie Mason and
Ida Brierley had returned.

"They have not come back yet," answered one of the teachers. "We saw
them going up the lake against the wind. We were a little bit worried,
but I presume the motor boat can take care of itself in quite a blow."

"All they've got to do is to turn on the gasolene, while in a rowboat
sometimes a fellow's muscles give out," was Andy's comment, and this
caused a smile.

After bidding the girls and the others good-bye, the four Rovers walked
towards the town. There they were fortunate enough to find the Hall
auto-stage, and were soon at the school once more.

"Gee! but my arms ache!" was Fred's remark on the way. "The muscles
hurt so I can hardly keep still."

"You'd better bathe them well with witch hazel or alcohol," returned
Jack. "My muscles feel sore, too."

"It took the wind right out of me," came from Andy. "Funny, too--with
so much wind all around," he added merrily.

"I can't help but think of how Martell and Brown treated us," said
Randy, seriously. "It was as mean as dirt!"

"I believe they would have left us there to drown!" added Fred.

"Oh, I wouldn't like to think that of them," broke in Jack. "Just the
same, it was a very dirty thing to do. Not on our account so much as on
account of the girls."

When the boys got back, the first person they met was Spouter, who
wanted to know how his cousin May had enjoyed the outing. He listened
in some alarm to the story the Rovers had to relate.

"It was a narrow shave all right," was the comment. And then his face
took on a stern look. "And to think Nappy Martell and Slugger Brown
treated you that way! Those fellows ought to be run out of this
school!"

The squall on the lake had been noticed by some of the other cadets who
had been out on the river; and the news soon spread of the danger into
which the Rovers and their companions had run. Gif, Ned, Walt, and
several others wanted to know the particulars of the affair, and all
were loud in their denunciation of the cadets who had been running the
motor boat.

"Spouter is right!" declared Gif. "Those fellows ought to be run out of
Colby Hall!"

"After this I want nothing more to do with them!" added Ned.

"I wonder what they would say if some of you had been drowned,"
remarked Walt.

"Makes me want to pitch into 'em," came from Fatty, who was present.
"But then, in one way, it's a pity to dirty one's hands on such cattle
as that."

Of course, the Rover boys had come in late for supper. Professor Lemm
had started to find fault with Andy and Fred for this, but he was
quickly stopped by Colonel Colby, who had come up to learn the
particulars of what had occurred.

"I heard you were out in that big blow," remarked the colonel. "I trust
none of you suffered from it."

"Well, we had rather a narrow escape," answered Fred. Then he and Andy
gave a brief outline of what had happened, not forgetting to mention
how Martell and Brown had left them to their fate.

"Too bad! too bad!" murmured the colonel, shaking his head slightly. "I
did not think that any of our cadets would do such a thing;" and then
he walked away in a very thoughtful mood.

"I wonder what he'll say to Brown and Martell," mused Fred, as, after
being dismissed by Professor Lemm, they hurried to the mess hall. As
they were late, they had missed the parade.

"Maybe he'll give 'em a piece of his mind. I hope he does," answered
his cousin.

Nappy Martell and Slugger Brown did not appear until supper was almost
over. Both had a gloomy look, as if something had gone decidedly wrong.
They glared sourly at the Rover boys and their chums, and then sat down
to their meal without saying a word to anybody.

"I'll wager something slipped a cog with them," whispered Fred to Jack.

"I've got an idea," returned the oldest of the Rover boys. "Maybe
Jennie Mason and that other girl who were out in the motor boat gave
them a piece of their mind for not aiding us."

"Oh, I hope they did, Jack!"

"It wouldn't be anything to wonder at. That Jennie Mason seemed to be a
nice girl, and I don't think she would stand for any such meanness."

Jack's surmise concerning what had happened to Nappy and Slugger was
correct. The two girls had pleaded with the two cadets to go back and
give those in the rowboats aid. And after much argument, in which Nappy
and Slugger had proved that they were anything but young gentlemen, the
girls had politely asked to be taken ashore. This had brought on
something of a quarrel, and in the end the two cadets had taken the
girls to a dock near the lumber yards and quite a distance from
Clearwater Hall.

"Now you can have the fun of walking to the school," had been Nappy
Martell's final words.

"And I don't think you'll go out with us again in a hurry," Slugger
Brown had added.

"I'll never go out with you again," Ida Brierley had answered.

"And I'd much prefer to walk to the school alone than to ride any
further with you in the motor boat," Jennie Mason had added; and thus
the four had parted, the two girls resolving in their hearts never to
have anything more to do with Nappy Martell and Slugger Brown.




CHAPTER XXII

THE MEETING WITH HIXLEY HIGH


Football talk now filled the air at Colby Hall, and for the time being
most of the cadets forgot about how the Rovers had been treated on the
lake by Nappy Martell and Slugger Brown.

Nappy was particularly angry, because of the way he had been treated by
Jennie Mason, on whom he had been sweet ever since they had become
acquainted. Slugger, too, was hurt over what the girls had said about
his meanness. But he was far more put out over the fact that he could
act only as a substitute on the regular eleven, and that Gif Garrison
had finally concluded to put Jack in his place. Fred had not won out
for the first eleven, but Gif had told him he stood so high on the
scrub that he might possibly make the team before the season came to an
end.

"It's all those Rovers' fault," growled Slugger Brown to Martell.

"Of course it is!" was the unreasonable reply. "I'll tell you, Slug, we
ought to do something to get square with those chaps."

"If I break loose and do that, it'll be something they'll remember as
long as they live!" declared Slugger Brown, vehemently.

Nappy Martell looked at his crony knowingly, and then glanced around to
see if anybody was listening.

"Let's do it right now, Slug," he said in a low voice. "I don't care
what it is, so long as we can get the best of those Rovers."

"We'll think it over, Nap. This isn't to be any one-cent, every-day
affair, you know."

"Right you are! I'm game for anything--just remember that!" added the
other cadet.

As Gif Garrison had said, there were three football games scheduled for
Colby Hall that Fall. The first of these was to be with Hixley High
School, located in a town at the other end of the lake. Then would
follow a game of more importance with the Clearwater Country Club, at
their beautiful grounds on the outskirts of Haven Point. And then the
last and most important game of all--that with Columbus Academy,
located about ten miles away. Whether the last named game would be
played at Colby Hall or at the Columbus Academy grounds, was still a
question.

In a few days Jack recovered completely from the spiking he had
received from Slugger Brown, and then he went at his football practice
with greater vigor than ever. He took Slugger's place on the regular
eleven, as already mentioned, and in his first game they beat the scrub
team by a score of 32 to 12.

"Now, that's better!" declared Gif. "You didn't let the scrub walk all
over you."

Fred had been on the scrub team, and, although that eleven had been
defeated, he was in a rather happy frame of mind, for the reason that
out of the twelve points scored he had been directly responsible for
six points.

"I think Fred is going some," remarked Jack to Gif, later on when he
had a chance to speak to the football captain privately.

"You're right, Jack," was the answer. "And I've got my eye on him."

The game with Hixley High was not a very important one, yet it was made
the occasion for quite a gala day by not only the boys of both schools
but likewise the girls attending the high school and also the young
ladies of Clearwater Hall. The Rover boys and some of their chums
invited Ruth and her several friends, including Jennie Mason and Ida
Brierley, to be present, and this invitation was gladly accepted.

"I don't wonder that Slugger Brown and Nappy Martell look so glum
occasionally," remarked Spouter to Jack the day after the invitations
had been given and accepted. "I just had a talk with my cousin May, and
she says Jennie Mason and Ida Brierley are through with those two
cadets. They told Nappy and Slugger they thought they were nothing but
cowards for the way they treated you Rovers on the lake."

"Well, I'm glad they've given up going with that pair," announced Jack.

The last game with Hixley High had been played on the grounds of that
institution, so that the game this year was to take place at Colby
Hall.

"You fellows will have the honor of bringing the girls over from
Clearwater Hall," remarked Jack to his cousins and his chums. "I'll
have to stay here and do a bit of practising."

The auto-stage and a number of automobiles and carriages had been
requisitioned, and also a number of motor boats on the lake, and in
these the young folks from Hixley High School and from Clearwater Hall
journeyed to Colby Hall.

Jack was on the lookout for Ruth and the others, and lost no time in
greeting the girl as soon as she appeared.

"I'm so glad that you're on hand to encourage us to win," said he, as
he took Ruth's hand.

"Thank you. But how are you sure I am here to encourage you?" she
questioned mischievously. "Maybe I'm going to root for Hixley High."

"You dare!" he returned earnestly, and then they both laughed and
hurried towards the grandstand, where seats had been reserved for the
entire party.

"Whoop her up for Hixley High!" was the cry. And then those in favor of
the high school took up the slogan:

    "Do or die!
    Hixley High! Hixley High!"

"They mean to win if yelling will do it," was May Powell's comment.

"Oh, I guess the cadets of Colby Hall can yell, too," responded Fred.
And he was right, for a moment later there boomed out this refrain:

    "Who are we?
    Can't you see?
    Colby Hall!
    Dum! Dum! Dum, dum, dum!
    Here we come with fife and drum!
    Colby! Colby! Colby Hall!"

And this the cadets repeated over and over again until they were
hoarse.

"Well, I've got to go now," said Jack, reluctantly, as word came for
the team to gather in the dressing room for final instructions.

"Good-bye then," said Ruth, sweetly. And then, looking Jack full in the
eyes, she added earnestly: "Oh, I do hope you'll win!"

They were simple words, but the way in which they were spoken, and the
look that accompanied them, thrilled the youth to the heart, and he
went down to the dressing room on feet that seemed to be walking on
air.

"Now then, boys, I expect every one of you to do his level best," said
Gif. "Hixley High has been bragging everywhere that it has a superior
team this year and is going to walk all over us. I want you to play
with vigor from the very start;" and then followed a number of
directions concerning plays and signals, to all of which his eleven
listened earnestly.

When the Colby Hall team came forth, they were given a loud round of
applause, and this was repeated when Hixley High showed itself. The
high school boys were nearly all seniors, and a glance sufficed to show
that, player for player, they were quite a few pounds heavier than the
cadets.

"If our eleven wins this game they will be going some," was Fatty's
whispered comment to a fellow cadet.

"You're right there," was the answer. "Those chaps certainly look
pretty husky."

It is not my intention here to give the particulars of this game with
Hixley High, interesting as it proved to be. It was not the big game of
the season--that was to come later. During the first quarter, the
playing on both sides was rather rough and ragged, each school doing
its best to wear its opponent out at the very start. In these
onslaughts the weight carried by Hixley High told, so that when the
whistle blew the score was 6 to 3.

"Hurrah! Hurrah!" came from the supporters of the high school. And
again and again they boomed out with their slogan.

"This game isn't over yet!" cried one of the followers of Colby Hall.

"We haven't begun to play yet! Just watch us in the second half!" added
another cadet.

"Oh, dear! I thought Colby Hall would score, sure!" pouted Ruth.

"Those Hixley High boys are awfully big fellows," answered May.

The second quarter opened with a good deal of cheering for each side.
The playing now became more settled, and the ball went back and forth
from the 20-yard line on one side to the 30-yard line on the other.
Then came a mix-up, in the midst of which Jack managed to get the ball
and start with it for the goal.

"Rover has it!"

"Run, Jack, run! Leg it for all you're worth!"

And Jack did run, making the best of his opportunity. Three of the
Hixley High players did their utmost to down him, but when the third
laid him low, he was directly over the chalk mark.

"A touchdown!" was the cry from the Colby Hall cadets. And then they
gave vent to their feelings by tooting their horns and sounding their
rattles.

The touchdown was followed by a skilful kick for goal, and with this in
their favor, Colby Hall went at the game with renewed vigor, so that
when the whistle blew for the ending of the second half the score stood
13 to 6 in favor of Colby Hall.

"That's the way to do it!"

"Keep it up, boys!"

"Oh, wasn't that a splendid run by Jack?" cried Ruth, enthusiastically.

"It certainly was!" answered one of the other girls.

With the score piling up against them, Hixley High grew fairly frantic
in the third quarter. As a consequence, their play became rougher than
ever, and twice they had to be called to order, and once they were
penalized. But their vigor told, and in spite of all Colby Hall could
do to hold them back, they gained constantly, and when the end of the
third quarter was reached the score was a tie.

"Thirteen to thirteen! What do you think of that?"

"Some playing, eh?"

Each side cheered its own, but many were the anxious faces when the two
elevens lined up for the final quarter.

"Now then, boys, dig into them!" cried Mr. Crews, earnestly. "Show them
what Colby Hall can do!"

"Watch 'em--watch 'em closely!" cautioned Gif. "They may try to pull
off some new stunt at the last minute."

Once more the two teams went at it "hammer and tongs." It was certainly
a battle royal, and on more than one occasion it looked as if some of
the players might be seriously injured. As it was, Hixley High had to
put in one substitute, and Colby Hall took on two. But the fighting
blood of the cadets was now up, and with a great rush they carried the
ball over the Hixley High line. They failed, however, to kick the goal,
much to the regret of their followers.

"Never mind, boys," said Gif, encouragingly. "Hold 'em now! That is all
I ask of you--hold 'em!"

And hold them Colby did, although the high school lads fought like
demons to carry the ball across the cadets' territory. Back and forth
went the play, the crowd meanwhile yelling itself hoarse. The ball was
on the Colby Hall 15-yard line when the whistle blew and the game was
over.

"Colby Hall wins!"

"Hurrah! Hurrah!"

Then the horns and rattles sounded out louder than ever, and in a
twinkling the football field was alive with visitors, and the
triumphant eleven was surrounded.




CHAPTER XXIII

TARGET PRACTICE


Colby Hall prepared for a great celebration that night in honor of
their victory over Hixley High. Boxes and barrels had been stored away
in anticipation of just such an occasion, and these were brought out
and stacked up at a safe place along the river front.

"Bonfires to-night--and big ones, too!" cried Andy, and let off his
surplusage of spirits by turning several handsprings.

"Look out, Andy!" cried Fred, "or some circus will capture you."

"Sour grapes!" retorted the fun-loving youth.

"Oh, it was grand--the way you held Hixley High back in that last
quarter!" remarked Ruth to Jack. "I was so afraid they would break
through and score, I could hardly wait for the whistle to blow."

"It was certainly some game!" answered Jack. "You see, they are so much
heavier than we are."

The victorious eleven came in for all sorts of congratulations, and
Jack was slapped on the back until the wind was almost knocked out of
him. As soon as he could escape from his friends, he and the others
took the girls down to a waiting automobile and set off for Clearwater
Hall. On the way the young folks sang and cut up to their hearts'
content, having the best possible time.

The only cadet at Colby Hall who was not elated over the victory was
Slugger Brown. Even though two substitutes had been used in the game,
and even though the big fellow had repented of his former decision, and
agreed to play if called upon, Gif had ignored him and used a player at
least ten pounds lighter in weight.

"He doesn't intend to give me a show--and that's all there is to it,"
remarked Slugger to Nappy Martell, bitterly.

"Well, you told him you wouldn't play unless you could go out at the
start of the game," answered his crony.

"I told him that first, but afterwards I agreed to go in as a sub,"
growled Brown. "But I can see how it is--those Rovers have told
Garrison how we acted on the lake, and so Garrison has made up his mind
to ignore me entirely, even though I've got the weight and can play as
good as any of them."

"Oh, I don't doubt but what it's the Rovers' fault!" retorted Martell.
"And that puts me in mind--are we going to do anything to get square or
not?"

"Don't worry about that, Nap--we'll do something all right enough! But
I want the chance first to think up something that will be worth
while," answered Slugger Brown, emphatically.

The bonfires along the river were lit directly after supper, after the
cadets had received permission from Colonel Colby. The boys were
allowed to do about as they pleased, the only stipulation being that
they should avoid anything that might be dangerous or ungentlemanly.

With the bonfires blazing high, throwing a lurid glare over the campus
and parade grounds, the cadets sang and danced and then started an
impromptu parade which took them around the various buildings of the
school. Many carried torches, while four had drums and bugles. There
was a good deal of horseplay, and also something in the way of hazing.

"Here is where we get back at Codfish for some of his meanness!" cried
Randy, as he and some of the others caught the sneak.

Then Codfish was made to stand up on an unusually large barrel and
sing, after which he was told to hold out each hand for a valuable
present.

"I don't want any present! I want to get down!" cried the sneak.

"Oh, this is something very valuable, Codfish," returned Randy, and
winked at some of the others.

Just for the fun of it, some of the cadets had obtained some potatoes
from the storehouse and started to roast these under one of the
bonfires. Two of the potatoes, quite hot and black, were brought forth
and thrust into Codfish's hands.

"Ouch! What do you mean by handing me red-hot potatoes!" yelled the
sneak, in alarm.

"Oh, we thought you were hungry," cried one of the other cadets.

"You wanted to burn me--that's what you wanted to do!" shrieked
Codfish, who, however, was far more scared than hurt. "I want to get
down!"

"You've got to give us a dance first, Codfish," ordered Randy.

"That's right! Give us a jig!" put in Andy.

"Make it a Boston seven-step," suggested Jack.

"Or a Washington dip," added Fred.

A dozen of the cadets were shouting at poor Codfish to dance, and
presently the excited boy commenced to shuffle his feet.

"Now jump up three times and we'll let you go!" cried Randy.

Codfish made one leap into the air and came down on the barrel top
successfully. Then he tried a second leap, but, as Randy well knew, the
barrel top was weak, and, with a crash, poor Codfish went down straight
into the big barrel up to his armpits.

"Whoop! Codfish has busted the barrel!" cried Fred.

"What do you mean by breaking up housekeeping like that, Codfish?"
demanded Andy.

"Let's do the baker act for him," went on Randy, quickly.

"The baker act?" queried several of the cadets. "What's that?"

"Don't you know the baker loves his rolls?" answered Andy, with a broad
grin.

"That's the talk!" came in a shout. "Let's give Codfish a roll;" and
before the sneak could save himself the barrel was tipped up on its
side and sent rolling over and over towards the parade ground.

"Ouch! Let up! I'll be killed!" screamed the victim. "This barrel may
have a lot of nails in it!"

"Oh, do you think that's true?" asked one of the cadets in fright.

"Nary a nail! I saw to that before we used the barrel," answered Randy.
"Such a rolling won't hurt him a bit;" and the cadets continued their
sport with the barrel, finally sending it down a slight hill in the
direction of the river. Here it lodged against some bushes, and Codfish
was allowed to crawl forth. At once he took to his heels and
disappeared.

It was noticed by many that Slugger Brown and Nappy Martell had not
participated in the festivities of the evening. The two had gone off
for a walk, during which they smoked many cigarettes and talked over
their grievances against the Rovers. On their return they were met by
Codfish, who related to them his tale of woe.

"Oh, we've got to do something," was Nappy Martell's comment. "If we
don't, before we know it the Rovers will be fairly running this
school."

"Well, they won't run me," growled Slugger Brown.

The following Monday found the Rover boys once more hard at work over
their studies. They had now settled down to the regular routine of the
Hall, and were doing very well, not only in their classes, but also in
their training as young soldiers. Each of them could march and handle a
gun as well as anybody, and now they were given the privilege of
practising at target shooting--something which interested them greatly.

"Let's get up a little match among ourselves," said Randy one day; and
this was agreed upon, eight new cadets entering the contest.

The shooting was done at a target set up against a tree some distance
behind the gymnasium building; and the boys did their practising under
the direction of Captain Dale.

"It requires considerable practice to become an expert shot," said the
military instructor. "Once in a while we find someone who is a
natural-born sharpshooter, but that is very rare. Some of the best
shots in the army are men who, at the start, hardly knew how to handle
firearms."

At this target practice a perfect score would have netted twenty-five
points. The contest went on merrily, and at the conclusion it was found
that Andy had scored ten points; Randy, twelve; Jack, eighteen; and
Fred, nineteen. One other cadet, a youth named Lewis Barrow, had scored
twenty.

"Well, the prize goes to Barrow!" cried Jack.

"Yes. But we came pretty close to winning," cried Fred, with
justifiable pride.

"You and Jack needn't complain," was Andy's comment. "Eighteen and
nineteen points out of a possible twenty-five is going some, especially
for beginners."

"If I win the prize, what is it?" questioned Lewis Barrow, a tall,
lanky youth with a rather leathery face. He came from the far West, and
knew much more about firearms than did the Rovers.

"Oh, the prize is first choice of holes in half a dozen doughnuts,"
snickered Andy.

"Holes in doughnuts!" replied Barrow, who was not over-bright.
"Suffering buffaloes! What would a fellow do with holes out of
doughnuts?" and at this there was a little laugh.

"For beginners, I think you have all done very well," remarked Captain
Dale. "The lowest score, I see, is nine. Last year when the new cadets
went at practice, we had several fellows who didn't hit the target."

"Gee! I'd hate to go hunting with such chaps," was Andy's dry comment.
"A fellow would have to get right directly in front of 'em to be sure
of not being hit;" and this remark made even the military instructor
laugh.

"I'll be proud of all of you," said Major Ralph Mason, when he heard of
the scores that had been made. "First thing you know, we'll have a
company of genuine sharpshooters."

"This practising at a target will come in fine if we get a chance to do
any hunting this winter," remarked Fred. "Wow! Just think what would
have happened if that target had been a deer, or even a partridge!"

"A deer or a partridge isn't apt to stand still," returned Randy. "If
you want to become expert as a hunting shot, you'll have to practise at
a swinging target."

"Well, that's to come later, so Captain Dale said," was the answer.

"Say, let's go out hunting some day when the season opens!" cried Jack.
"I'd like first rate to bag something, even if it were only a few
rabbits."

"That's the talk!" answered Fred, quickly. "As soon as the hunting
season opens let's go out, by all means."

The target practice had been witnessed by Slugger Brown and Nappy
Martell. Now, when Jack and Fred spoke of hunting, Slugger Brown's face
became thoughtful.

"I think I see a way to square accounts with those Rovers," he remarked
to his crony. "From now on, I'm going to watch 'em pretty closely. If
ever they do go out hunting, I think we'll be able to put one over on
'em they'll never forget."




CHAPTER XXIV

THE FUN OF HALLOWE'EN


"Hallowe'en to-morrow night, boys! So get ready for some real fun!"

"Right you are, Andy! Remember what fun we had last year in New York?"

"And what fun we had down on the farm two years ago, scaring Aleck Pop
and Jack Ness nearly to death?" broke in Fred.

"I don't know whether they'll let us have any fun around Colby Hall or
not," remarked Jack, but in such a tone of voice that all of the others
knew he was fooling.

Several days had passed since the target practice, and the boys were
gathered in the room used by Andy and Randy for studying. All were deep
in a discussion of what they might do on Hallowe'en, when there came a
knock on the door and Dan Soppinger came in.

"Excuse me for interrupting you," commenced Dan, "but I'm up against a
hard proposition. Can any of you tell me----"

"Gee! the Human Question Mark is at it again!" broke out Randy.

"Certainly we can tell you," put in Andy; "but please don't ask it."

"Three and three make six, three and three always have made six, and
three and three always will make six!" cried Fred in a girlish tone of
voice. "So what's the use of asking a question like that?"

"Who said anything about three and three making six?" snorted the Human
Question Mark. "What I was going to say was: Can any of you tell
me----"

"When Nero discovered the north pole?" interrupted Andy.

"No. He wants to know when Washington first crossed the Pacific in a
motor boat," came from Fred.

"No; that isn't it at all," declared Jack, seriously. "Dan wants to
know what kind of an automobile Noah took on the ark."

"Great Scott! What do you take me for?" groaned Dan Soppinger,
helplessly. "Here I come in to ask you a perfectly simple question, and
you start with a lot of foolishness."

"Why, my dear Dan, we are helping you all we can!" cried Andy in deeply
injured tones.

"I want to know when Florida was first settled and by whom!" cried Dan,
desperately. "I bet ten cents none of you know!"

"Oh, that's easy, Dan," answered Andy, gravely. "Florida was first
settled by the alligators, in the year one;" and at this remark there
was such a burst of laughter that the Human Question Mark gave it up in
despair and fled.

"I've got a great scheme for Hallowe'en," said Andy a little later. He
had been walking up and down the room trying to make up his mind what
they might do to have some fun. "I wonder if the girls over at
Clearwater Hall wouldn't lend us some dresses and some girls' hats for
the occasion."

"They might if we agreed to lend them some of our suits in exchange."

"Well, we could do that easily enough," answered Fred. "We hardly ever
have a chance to wear anything these days but our uniforms."

"What do you want to do, Andy--dress up as a girl?" questioned Jack.

"That's it. We might have dead loads of fun."

The matter was discussed for a time, and in the end a boy, who often
did errands for the cadets, was dispatched to Clearwater Hall with a
note to Ruth and her chums. The boy had performed this sort of service
before, and knew that he must deliver the note without allowing the
communication to go through the school office.

The messenger returned just as the cadets were on the point of
retiring, and brought back a letter from the girls in which they agreed
to let the boys have what they wanted in return for some suits of male
attire. It was agreed that the exchange be made in the afternoon,
directly after the school session.

The Rover boys and two of their friends walked to Haven Point, and
there invested some of their spending money in the hire of an
automobile. Then they rode back to the school, procured several bundles
of clothing, and set out for Clearwater Hall.

The girls were waiting for them at a spot secluded from observation,
and there an exchange of bundles took place, interspersed with a good
deal of laughing by the cadets and giggling on the part of the
Clearwater pupils.

"Oh, I'd love to see you dressed up as a girl!" cried Ruth to Jack.

"How about your being dressed up as a boy?" he returned.

"Oh, none of us will dare show ourselves outside the grounds," returned
Ruth, blushing. "Miss Garwood wouldn't permit it."

"Well, if we get the chance, we may come up as far as yonder side
fence," put in Fred. "If we do, we'll give you the signal--three long
whistles."

Nearly all of the cadets at Colby Hall were ready for Hallowe'en fun.
They dressed up in all sorts of disguises, including those of monks,
Indians, negroes, and ghosts. Lighted pumpkins with grinning faces cut
into them were likewise numerous; and one senior trailed around in a
silk gown which he had brought from home for this very occasion.

When the Rover boys appeared dressed as young ladies, with girls' hats
on their heads and parasols in their hands, they were greeted with a
loud cheer, and this was redoubled as they marched around the campus
arm in arm with several boys dressed as dudes, and one attired as an
admiral.

"Some class to the Rovers, and no mistake!" was Spouter's comment. He
had on a pair of long whiskers, a linen duster, farm boots, and a big
straw hat.

"How do you do, Uncle Si?" cried Andy, coming up to him and bowing.
"How is corn?"

"So high, by gosh! y'u can't see the house," answered Spouter in
country dialect. "Do tell, leetle gal! but y'u do look mighty purty,
y'u do!" and at this there was a general snicker.

At the first opportunity, the Rovers and several of their friends
slipped away from the campus and hurried off in the direction of
Clearwater Hall. They were lucky enough to meet a big wagon, the driver
of which was going to the next town to pick up some young folks for a
straw ride. This man took them to the young ladies' school just for the
sport of it.

When the Rovers gave the signal, Ruth and her friends came running
towards the side fence of the grounds. All were attired in male
costumes, wearing exaggerated collars, cuffs and neckties. In addition,
Ruth had on a big pair of pick-toed shoes and a silk hat many years out
of date. She also carried a silver-headed cane.

"Oh, don't you want to take us out for a walk?" questioned Andy, in a
high-pitched, feminine voice.

"Very sorry, my dear, very sorry," came from May Powell, in as deep a
voice as she could command. "I have important business to attend to."

"Oh, Jack, what an awfully big girl you do make!" screamed Ruth, when
she discovered his identity behind the little mask he wore. "I didn't
know you were so large."

"And what a little man you are," he answered, gaily.

"Don't say a word," she returned. "See these sleeves? They are all
rolled up; and I had to do the same with the trousers," and she laughed
merrily.

Although acting against the rules, the Rovers and their friends found
an opening in the fence, and for a brief quarter of an hour mingled
with the girls on the campus of the school. They had "a barrel of fun,"
to use Andy's way of expressing it, and left only because it was
getting late and they knew they would have to walk all the way back to
Colby Hall.

"This is about the best Hallowe'en fun we ever had," remarked Jack,
while he and the others were on the return to the school.

To make time, the boys did not take the regular road through Haven
Point to Colby Hall, but tramped along a back highway which was
considered something of a short cut. This presently brought them in
sight of a large farm which belonged to a hard-fisted man named Elias
Lacy.

"Say, we ought to call on old Lacy and give him a scare," said Randy,
coming to a halt near the farmhouse.

"It would serve him right!" answered Fred, promptly.

None of the Rovers had a kindly feeling for Elias Lacy, for the reason
that the old man had once caught them getting chestnuts from a tree on
the corner of his farm and had made them give up all the nuts they had
gathered and had then threatened them with the law if they dared to set
foot on his premises again.

"I know you cadets," he had snarled. "You are all a pack of petty
thieves! I want you to keep away from here."

He had suffered a great deal, some cadets, including Slugger Brown and
Nappy Martell, having at various times robbed him of his cherries, his
strawberries, and some melons. Of these depredations, however, the
Rovers knew nothing.

"Maybe Lacy isn't around," remarked Jack. "He may have gone to town."

They knew that the old man was a bachelor. He had two young men working
for him, and also a woman who came in during the day to do the
housework, but all of these went home at night.

"I see somebody moving around the house now," answered Randy. "It's
Lacy, too!"

"Let's knock on the door and pretend we are young ladies in distress,"
cried Randy. "Come on! I wonder what he'll do?"

"Don't ask him for any money. He won't give you a cent," chuckled Fred.

"Let's tell him some tramps stopped us and that we want him to go out
and fight the fellows," suggested one cadet. "That will show how brave
a man Lacy is. We can take off our masks."

So it was arranged, and in a minute more the boys were all on the front
piazza of the farmhouse ringing the old doorbell. There was a sound
within, and in a moment more Elias Lacy came to the door with a lamp in
one hand.

"What do you want?" he asked in astonishment, when he saw what looked
to be a number of well-dressed girls confronting him.

"Oh, Mr. Lacy, won't you please protect us?" pleaded Randy, in his best
feminine voice.

"Three murderous tramps are after us!" gasped Andy. "Oh, dear! I know I
shall faint!"

"The tramps wanted to rob us!" cried Jack.

"They are just outside your fence," put in Fred. "Please go out and
chase them away."

Elias Lacy was staggered. He placed his lamp on a little table near by,
and looked in wonder at the crowd before him.

"Three tramps, eh? An' goin' to rob you? Why, I never heard of sech a
thing!" he shrilled. "Mebbe I'd better git my gun."

"Oh, yes! yes! Get your gun, by all means! Get your gun! And maybe
you'd better get a sword, too!" cried Randy.

"Yes! Or a knife or a--a--razor," put in Andy.

"Now, now! don't git so excited!" cried the old man, for the boys
insisted upon clinging to his arms and to his shoulders. "Them tramps
ain't goin' to eat you up."

He was short-sighted, and, as the lamplight was poor, he had not
noticed the boys' somewhat crude make-up. He hurried into a room and
came forth presently carrying a shotgun. Then he walked back into his
kitchen.

"Great Csar! he's got his gun all right enough," said Jack in a low
voice.

"Maybe he'll use it on us when he discovers the trick," returned Fred.

"I'll git my lantern, an' then we kin go after them tramps," announced
Elias Lacy; and in a moment more he reappeared with a smoky lantern and
started for the front door. "Come on, an' show me where them tramps
are," he said, determinedly.




CHAPTER XXV

OFF ON A HUNT


"Say, as soon as we are outdoors let us give him the ha-ha and run
away," whispered Fred to the others.

"Oh, no! Let's have some more fun," pleaded Randy. "Why! the sport has
just begun!"

"That's it!" came from his twin.

"Don't forget we are due at the Hall," remonstrated Jack.

"Now then, show me them tramps!" cried Elias Lacy, as the whole crowd
went outdoors and towards the front gate.

"Oh, protect us! Please protect us!" shrieked Randy, and caught hold of
the old man's coat-tails.

"Don't let the tramps abduct us! I don't want to live with any tramp! I
want to marry a millionaire!" screamed Andy, and began to cling so
close to Elias Lacy that the old man could hardly move forward.

The twins cut up so that the others had all they could do to keep from
laughing. One boy began to snicker, but promptly clapped his hand over
his mouth.

"Don't hang on to me," ordered the old farmer. "I can't use my gun if
you clutch my arm like that," and he tried to shake the twins off.

"Oh, there they are--behind the bushes!" screamed Randy, suddenly,
pointing off to the left.

"Where?" demanded the old man, holding his lantern over his head. "I
don't see nothin'."

"There they are!" screamed Andy. "They've got pistols, too! Oh, save
us! Save us!"

"Drat the pesky rascals! I'll fix 'em!" snarled Elias Lacy, and,
shaking loose the clinging boys, he ran off, lantern in one hand and
shotgun held up to his shoulder with the other.

"Now is our time to skip out!" cried Jack.

"Right you are!" added another of the crowd. And then without waiting
for the rest, this cadet let up a cry: "Sold! Mr. Lacy, you are sold!"

"Sold! With the compliments of the Colby Hall cadets!" cried another.
And then, seeing that the disguise was at an end, the boys began to
shout a variety of things not at all complimentary to the old farmer.

Elias Lacy was thunderstruck by the sudden turn of affairs, and,
wheeling around, he stared in open-mouthed wonder at the retreating
girlish figures.

"What's that?" he shrilled. "What are you runnin' away fur?"

"Good-bye, Mr. Lacy!" sang out Randy. "We're only having a little fun."

"Don't you know it's Hallowe'en?" queried Andy; and then started to
walk off on his hands, but the dress he wore fell down around him and
caused him to tumble over on his back. In the gloom, Fred stumbled and
fell on top of him.

"Fun! Hallowe'en!" bellowed Elias Lacy, and of a sudden he became
filled with rage. "You ain't gals at all! You're only playin' a trick
on me!" he snarled.

"Good-bye and pleasant dreams!" shouted Randy.

"Don't tell any of your friends about the young ladies who called on
you," advised Jack.

And then the other cadets made various taunting remarks. They had come
to a halt to enjoy the old farmer's discomfiture and at the same time
to give Andy and Fred a chance to regain their feet.

"Halt!" suddenly commanded Elias Lacy, and set down his lantern on a
fence post. "Halt! or I'll shoot some of you!" and he aimed his shotgun
at them.

"Don't shoot!" cried several of the cadets in alarm, for they could see
that the old man was in a frame of mind to do almost anything.

"Stop! Don't you dare stir a step or I'll shoot as sure as you're
standin' there!" continued the old man. And then, as all of the boys
halted he went on: "Now come up here where I kin git a good look at
you, but don't you come too clost or try to play any more tricks. If
you do, somebody'll sure git shot."

There was no help for it, and rather sheepishly the crowd of cadets
came forward as he had ordered.

"It was only a bit of Hallowe'en fun. We didn't mean any harm," pleaded
Randy.

"Take them bunnets an' things off so I kin see your faces," ordered the
old man, at the same time keeping the crowd covered with his shotgun.

With great reluctance one after another the cadets took off their veils
and hats. The old man came a step or two closer, looking at each face
sharply. His countenance grew even more hateful when he recognized the
Rovers.

"Ha! you're the same fellers who robbed my chestnut tree," he snarled.
"Didn't I tell you to keep off my premises? I've a good mind to have
you locked up."

"Oh, come, Mr. Lacy, it was only a bit of fun," pleaded one lad.
"Didn't you go out on Hallowe'ens when you were a boy?"

"No, I didn't! I stayed home an' done my work," was the harsh reply.
"Nowadays boys cut up altogether too much."

Had it not been for the shotgun the boys would have taken to their
heels; but with the old man thus armed none of them wanted to take any
chances. But then came a lucky interruption. From back on the farm came
a wild bellowing as if a cow was in trouble. This was followed by the
squealing of a number of pigs.

"Hello! Those town boys must have come over after your cattle after
all!" cried Jack, struck by a sudden idea.

"My cattle! What do you know about my cattle?" questioned Elias Lacy,
quickly.

"That's it! The town boys are after the cows and pigs!" broke in Fred,
quick to catch Jack's idea.

"You'll lose them all if you don't look out, Mr. Lacy!" put in Randy.

"They sha'n't tech my cows, nor my pigs neither!" snarled the old
farmer; and, taking up his lantern, he left the cadets and ran off
towards the rear of the premises. Fortunately, nothing serious had
happened to his stock.

"Now's the time to skip out!" cried Jack, and led the way, and the
others lost no time in following. The cadets had to hold their skirts
high to keep from tripping as they sped along. They reached Colby Hall
in safety, and lost no time in rejoining their friends. A little later
the Hallowe'en celebration came to an end.

"Old Lacy will remember us," was Andy's comment, in speaking of the
affair the next day. "He'll have it in for us."

"I'm afraid so," replied Jack, seriously.

The main topic of conversation at the school now was the football game
which was to take place with the eleven of the Clearwater Country Club
on the following Saturday. This was another gala occasion for the
school, and once more the boys had the pleasure of escorting the girls
to and from the conflict.

"I hope we can do them up as we did Hixley High," remarked Jack. But
this was not to be. The Clearwater Country Club eleven were much older
than the cadets and much heavier, and all the Colby Hall team could do
was to hold them down to a score of 16 to 10.

"Well, that's not so bad but what it might be worse," remarked Gif,
when the defeated eleven had returned to Colby Hall. "I did hope,
however, that we might hold them to at least a tie."

"They carried too much weight for us," replied Jack. "Even Slugger
Brown couldn't do anything against them." For Slugger had been used as
a substitute in the third and fourth quarters. But the big cadet had
failed to show either form or efficiency. He had been warned by the
umpire, because of an unfair tackle, and this had put him in anything
but a good humor.

"I won't play again so long as Gif Garrison is captain!" cried Slugger
to Nappy Martell; and that evening he sent in his resignation, which
Gif promptly accepted.

The game with Columbus Academy was not to take place until two weeks
later, so that, although they kept at their practice, the football
players had considerable time for other things. Jack and his cousins
had continued their target practice, and their shooting was now so
accurate that Captain Dale complimented them upon it.

"The hunting season opens to-morrow," announced Jack one day, as he
came back from an errand to the town. "How I'd like to go out and try
my luck!"

"I'd like to go myself," spoke up Fred.

A number of the senior cadets had received permission to go hunting and
Jack spoke to one of these youths about the prospects.

"I'd like first rate to have you come with me, Rover," said the cadet,
Frank Newberry by name; "and if your cousin Fred wants to come along,
he can do so."

"We'd have to get permission first, and also permission to use a couple
of the shotguns," answered Jack. The gun rack at Colby Hall boasted a
number of these weapons, but none of them could be taken out and used
without special permission from Captain Dale.

It was no easy matter for Jack and Fred to gain the desired permission,
but when Colonel Colby heard from Captain Dale what good shots the boys
had proved to be, he said they might go out, along with Frank Newberry
and some of the others.

"But I want you to be very careful," said the colonel impressively. "I
wouldn't have an accident happen to you for the world. Don't fire a
charge until you are absolutely sure of what you're firing at. Never
point your gun at anybody else; and be very careful how you handle your
weapon in climbing a fence or leaping over rocks or brushwood."

The twins were a bit envious over the prospects for their cousins, but
they wished Jack and Fred the best of luck. All of the cadets who were
to go out had lessons in the morning, but they departed directly after
dinner, and were told that they could remain out as long as they
pleased.

"Now, don't forget to bring back a deer or a bear," cried Andy.

"And if you can, bag a buffalo or a hippopotamus," added his twin.

"We'll be lucky if we bag some rabbits and a squirrel or two or some
woodcock," answered Jack. "Big game doesn't exist around here any more.
The farms are too thick."

"Well, be sure and bring down a pink canary bird, anyway," advised
Andy; and at this there was a general laugh.

Frank Newberry had been out the year before, and consequently knew much
about the lay of the land.

"We'll go down into the woods directly back of Haven Point," he
announced. "Last year the hunting there was much better than it was up
the Rick Rack River."

And then off the cadets started on the hunt. Much that was unusual lay
in store for them.




CHAPTER XXVI

FROM ONE TROUBLE TO ANOTHER


Half an hour of tramping brought the two Rover boys and their friends
into the heart of the big woods Frank Newberry had mentioned. They had
entered it by way of the road they had used on Hallowe'en, and were now
almost directly behind Elias Lacy's farm. In fact, although they were
not aware of this, a large section of the woods belonged to the old
farmer.

On their way into the timber they had heard various shots at a
distance, showing that other hunters were abroad. Then came a report so
close at hand, it made Fred jump.

"You want to be very careful so that you don't mistake some other
hunter for game," cautioned Frank Newberry.

"Exactly!" grumbled Fred. "And I want the other hunters to be careful
that they don't shoot me for a deer or a bear."

The cadets continued to advance into the woods, and then crossed an
open space. Here they were fortunate enough to stir up quite a few
rabbits, and Jack, after an hour's hunt, had the pleasure of bringing
down two, while one was laid low by Fred.

So far the cadets had kept together, but presently the party managed to
catch sight of game in two directions, and soon Frank Newberry and the
seniors with him were hurrying off to the southward while the Rover
boys went after game that had gone northward.

"Come right back to this spot!" cried Frank Newberry to the Rovers.

"All right," answered Jack.

Their sporting blood, aroused by the game already brought down, urged
Jack and Fred forward, and almost before they knew it they had covered
a long distance. They presently came to another clearing, bordering a
good-sized pond. Here they stirred up half a dozen rabbits and also
some squirrels, and each succeeded in bringing down more than half the
game sighted.

"Say, this is the finest sport ever!" declared Fred, as he looked at
his game with deep satisfaction. "Won't the others envy us when we get
back to the Hall with these!"

"It's sport enough for us," returned Jack. "I don't know what the
rabbits and squirrels think about it though," he added dryly.

From a distance the boys had seen more game and they began to circle
the pond. Then they heard a strange whirring in some bushes a distance
further on.

"Maybe we'll come across some wild turkeys or something like that,"
said Fred.

"I don't believe there are any wild turkeys around here," answered
Jack.

"Oh! wouldn't it be fine if we sighted a deer or a bear?" sighed Fred.

"You don't want much for your money, do you?" laughed his cousin. "I
rather think if a bear came after you you'd take to your heels."

"Maybe I would--if he was a big one."

On and on went the two boys, and presently were rewarded by the sight
of several small woodcock. Both fired almost at the same instant, and
two of the birds came fluttering down, to thrash around in the bushes
until put out of misery by the young hunters.

"Two of 'em! Think of that!" chuckled Fred. "Oh! this is simply
glorious!"

So far the two boys had not met any of the strange hunters, but now
they came across two men well loaded down with rabbits. They did not
know it, but one of the men was a farm hand employed by Elias Lacy.

"You'd better keep away from the Lacy place," said the man, with a
sarcastic look at the Rovers. He had been on hand when the lads had had
the chestnuts taken away by the old farmer, and had also heard about
the joke on Hallowe'en.

"Don't you worry. We've no use for Mr. Lacy," returned Fred, crossly.

"He's the meanest man we ever met," added Jack. At this the farm hand
only grinned, and then he and his companion disappeared once more into
the woods.

So far the day had been typical of the Autumn season, somewhat gray,
with only an occasional showing of the sun. Now, however, it became
rapidly darker, and presently a few flakes of snow sifted down through
the air.

"Hello! What do you know about this!" cried Jack, looking up. "I guess
we're going to have a snowstorm."

"Oh, I hope it doesn't snow very heavily--at least not until we get
back to school," returned Fred, quickly.

"A little snow won't hurt us, Fred."

"But if it got too thick, Jack, we might lose our way."

"I don't believe it will come down as heavily as all that--not at this
season of the year."

With the sky growing darker, and the flakes of snow coming down thicker
than ever, the two boys sought to retrace their steps in the direction
of the pond. But in their eagerness to sight something at which to
shoot, they had not noted their path very carefully, and as a
consequence they now found themselves somewhat bewildered.

"If the sun was only out we'd know in what direction to steer,"
remarked Jack. "But when the sky is this way, a fellow is apt to get
completely turned around."

"It's too bad we didn't bring a pocket compass."

"That's true. However, we haven't got one, so we'll have to make the
best of it. Come on!"

They had paused for a moment to rest and to survey their surroundings.
Now they continued their tramping, and at length came out on the edge
of a sheet of water which they at first took to be the pond they had
previously visited.

"There they go! Quick, Jack!" sang out Fred, and blazed away with his
shotgun. His cousin followed suit, and soon they found they had bagged
two additional rabbits--one the largest yet brought low.

"This isn't the pond at all!" cried Jack, in some disappointment, after
the excitement of shooting the rabbits had subsided. "I never saw this
spot before."

"Nor I! What do you make of it, Jack?"

"Don't ask me! It looks as if we were lost."

"Hark! I heard a shot!" cried Fred, a minute later, while the pair were
looking around trying to make up their minds in what direction to
proceed next. "Maybe those are our fellows shooting."

The shot had come from their right, and was presently followed by
another. Thinking their friends might be close at hand, the Rovers
started off as well as they could through the brushwood and between the
trees. But then they came to some rough ground covered with rocks, and
here further progress was all but impossible. In the meanwhile, no
further reports had reached their ears.

"We are sure up against it," remarked Jack, after he and his cousin had
looked at each other rather helplessly. It was darker than ever, and
the snow still continued to sift down through the trees.

"Maybe we'll have to stay out here all night," said Fred, after
consulting his watch. "It's half past five now."

"We ought to be on the way back to the Hall if we expect any supper,"
replied his cousin.

Being unable to advance further in that direction, the Rover boys
sought to retrace their steps, and after considerable trouble managed
to return to the sheet of water they had left a while before. But by
this time the darkness of night had fallen.

"It's no use!" cried Fred, helplessly. "We're lost, that's all there is
to it!"

"It was bad enough while it was daylight, Fred. I really don't know
what we are going to do now it's dark," answered Jack, seriously.

On the return to the little pond Fred had stumbled over some tree
roots, and this had lamed him a little.

"I can't walk very much further," he said, with a sigh. And then he
added quickly: "Jack, have you any matches?"

"Oh, yes! I put a box in my pocket before we started."

"Good! Then if we have to stay here we can build a fire and maybe cook
something."

The boys tried the water of the pond, and finding it fairly good drank
their fill. Then they sat down to discuss the situation. Both were
hungry, and in the end they gathered some dry sticks, started a fire,
and cooked one of the rabbits and also a squirrel, which they ate with
much satisfaction.

"We'll freeze to death if we stay here all night," was Fred's dismal
comment.

"Oh, no--not if we keep the fire going."

"Then let's do that by all means. It will not only keep us warm, but it
may be the means of directing somebody to this place."

It was a long night for both of the boys. They took turns at resting
and at replenishing the fire, and it is doubtful if either of them got
much real sleep. Once, in the early morning, came an alarm, and Fred
imagined a bear was in the bushes. But the animal, or whatever it was,
soon went away, and that was the end of the disturbance.

"Thank goodness! it has stopped snowing!" remarked Jack, when the
cousins were preparing a breakfast of another squirrel.

The snow had not amounted to much, being less than an inch in depth.
The storm had cleared away entirely, and at the proper time the sun
came up over the hills beyond Clearwater Lake.

Long before that time the two young hunters were once more on their
way. They had tramped along for fully half an hour when suddenly Jack
let up a shout of joy.

"Hurrah! we've struck a road at last! Now we'll find out where we are!"

The road was little more than a trail through the woods, evidently made
by the wagon or sled of some woodcutter. It ran down a slight hill, and
the two boys lost no time in following it.

"I hope it brings us into Haven Point," remarked Fred, as they strode
along. "I'm getting tired of walking and of carrying the shotgun. I'd
rather have a ride."

"Let us be thankful to get out of the woods, Fred. We might have gotten
so mixed up that we'd have had to spend another night there."

The two lads continued to follow the woods road, and presently came
into sight of several farm buildings, including a corncrib and a long,
low cowshed.

"Oh, for the love of doughnuts!" cried Jack an instant later. "Fred, do
you know where we are?"

"No, I don't. Where?"

"Right in the back of old Lacy's place! There is his house;" and the
oldest Rover boy pointed with his hand.

"You're right, Jack! Gee! we almost ran into the old man again, didn't
we?" gasped Fred. "We had better get out of here as quick as we can!"

"Now you're saying something!" returned his cousin. "Come on, before he
catches sight of us!"

The two boys had just started to leave the road on which they had been
traveling when a shout reached their ears. The next moment another
shout rent the frosty morning air, and then two men came running
towards the lads, one carrying a gun and the other a pitchfork.

"Stop there! you young rascals! Stop!" roared out the voice of Elias
Lacy. "Stop, I tell you! Caleb, cover 'em with your gun!"

"I'm doin' it, Mr. Lacy," replied the other man, and leveled his gun at
the boys. He was the same man the Rovers had met in the woods the
afternoon before.

With the weapon of the farm hand pointed at them the two Rover boys
came to a halt. In a minute more the others came up, Elias Lacy puffing
because of his exertions.

"Now I've caught you!" he snarled. "I didn't think it was goin' to be
so easy."

"You're certainly in luck, Mr. Lacy," grinned Caleb Boggs. "I didn't
think they'd stay roun' here after doin' it."

"They came back jest to have the laugh on me!" snarled the old farmer.
"I know 'em! I s'pose they did it 'cause I took them chestnuts away
from 'em, an' on account o' the way I treated 'em Hallowe'en night. But
I'll fix 'em now! I'll have the law on 'em! I'll send 'em to state's
prison for ten years! Jest you see if I don't!" and thus the old man
spluttered on, saying many things the boys could not understand.

"See here, Mr. Lacy! What are you so mad about?" queried Jack, finally.
"Can't you stand a little fun?"

"Stand a little fun!" yelled the excited old man, fairly beside himself
with rage. "It ain't no fun to kill two o' my cows!" He shook his bony
fist at the boys. "I'll have the law on you, so I will! I'll send you
both to state's prison for ten years!"




CHAPTER XXVII

ELIAS LACY'S DEMAND


The two Rover boys stared at Elias Lacy in open-mouthed amazement.

"What did you say about killing two cows?" questioned Jack.

"Have two of your cows been killed?" came from Fred.

At these questions the old farmer seemed to become more enraged than
ever. He raised his pitchfork as if to use it on the cadets.

"You can't play innercent with me!" he fairly screamed. "I know you!
You shot them cows, an' I'm a-goin' to send you to state's prison fur
it!"

"It's a purty serious business--killin' a man's cattle like that,"
added Caleb Boggs, with a shake of his head. He still held his shotgun
so as to cover the two boys.

"I don't know a thing about your cows, and I certainly haven't shot at
them," answered Jack, indignantly.

"We haven't been anywhere near your cow pasture, or your cowshed,
either," said Fred. "We've been hunting up in the woods yonder. Your
man saw us."

"We got lost up there after it began to snow, and we had to camp out
all night," explained Jack. "We just found that road and were trying to
get back to Haven Point and Colby Hall."

"It ain't so! It ain't so!" snarled Elias Lacy. "You come over to my
cow paster yesterday afternoon an' shot both o' them cows and then you
run away. One o' my men seen you."

"He never did!" burst out Jack. "I tell you we weren't near your
place."

"We went out hunting with a number of other cadets, and we can prove
it!" added his cousin.

"Huh! where are them other cadets now?" demanded the old farmer.

"We got separated in the woods--they going off for some rabbits in one
direction and we going off after some other rabbits in another
direction," explained the oldest Rover boy. "I don't know where those
other cadets are now. Probably they went back to the school."

"You ain't got no right to hunt on my grounds."

"We were out in the open woods, Mr. Lacy, where we had a perfect right
to be."

"Well, we won't talk about that now," snarled the old man. "I'm a-goin'
to fix you for shootin' them cows. They was two of the best cows I had,
an' they was wuth a lot o' money."

A wordy war followed, during which the boys became almost as angry as
the old farmer. They insisted upon it that they had not been near his
farm during the afternoon of the day before, but he did not believe a
word they said.

"I'm a-goin' to have the law on you!" he cried. "I'm a-goin' to have
you arrested! An' I'll make your folks pay fur them cows!"

"Hadn't we better march 'em down to the barn?" suggested the hired man.
"Then I kin hitch up the horses and we kin take 'em down to the town
lock-up."

"Oh, Jack, don't let them lock us up!" whispered Fred, in horror.

"If you lock us up, Mr. Lacy, you'll suffer for it," said Jack. "I'll
get my father to sue you for damages."

"Don't you talk to me like that, you young whipper-snapper!" cried the
old man. "I know what I'm a-doin'. I'm a-goin' to turn you over to the
town authorities, an' that's all there is to it!"

The old man was obdurate, and he and the hired man forced the boys into
the barn, where the farmer stood guard with the shotgun while the hired
man hooked up a team of horses to one of the farm wagons. Then the lads
were told to get into the turnout.

"I don't think I'll get in," said Jack.

"Yes, you will!" snarled Elias Lacy; and then followed a lively
scuffle. But the two boys were no match for the men, and they were
quickly disarmed. Then, being covered by the hired man's shotgun, they
had to get up into the wagon. The hired man drove, while Elias Lacy sat
in the rear, the shotgun ready for action so that the boys might not
escape. Their own guns, along with their game, were placed on the
bottom of the wagon under a blanket.

It must be confessed that Jack and Fred were in no enviable frame of
mind as the wagon with the two prisoners aboard headed in the direction
of Haven Point. They knew that news of their arrest would spread
rapidly, and they wondered what their friends, and especially the girls
at Clearwater Hall, would think of it.

"Gee, but we're in a pickle!" commented Fred, dismally.

"Yes. And the worst of it is, I don't know how we are going to clear
ourselves," answered his cousin. "As near as I can learn, those cows
were shot while you and I were off by ourselves in the woods. The hired
man says the other man who works on the place saw two cadets
disappearing between the trees."

"Who can those fellows be, Jack?"

"Don't ask me! Probably two of our fellows who have some grudge against
Lacy."

This talk was carried on in an undertone, so that neither the old
farmer nor his hired man could understand what was said.

"You needn't plan no trick to escape," warned Elias Lacy, raising his
shotgun slightly.

"Mr. Lacy, what did you do with the two cows that were shot?" asked
Jack, suddenly.

"I left 'em out in the paster, right where they fell," returned the old
farmer. "I ain't a-goin' to tech 'em till the authorities have looked
'em over."

"Were they killed with bird shot or with rifle bullets?"

"Bird shot--same as you've been a-usin' in them shotguns of yourn."

A portion of the roadway leading into Haven Point was being repaired
and was closed off; so, in order to get down into the town, they had to
make something of a detour in the direction of Colby Hall.

"Oh, Jack, hadn't we better ask him to take us to the Hall first?"
whispered Fred to his cousin. "Maybe Colonel Colby can fix this up for
us."

"I might ask him," returned Jack, in a low tone.

"I ain't a-goin' to Colby Hall," snarled Elias Lacy, after the question
had been put to him. "I'm a-goin' to take you to the lock-up."

The journey towards the town was continued, and presently those in the
wagon came within sight of a rural free delivery turnout.

"Hello there, Pete! Got any letters for us?" sang out the farm hand.

"One fur Mr. Lacy," replied the post carrier, and, driving closer, he
handed it over.

"I ain't got no time to read letters now," announced Elias Lacy, as he
thrust the communication into his pocket. "I've got other business to
'tend to."

"Givin' a couple of the Colby cadets a ride, eh?" ventured the carrier.

"I'm a-takin' 'em to the lock-up, Pete. They went an' shot two o' my
cows."

"You don't say, 'Lias!" cried the carrier in amazement. "Out huntin' I
s'pose, and mistook 'em for deer or bears," and he chuckled over his
little joke.

"No; they done it a-purpose," growled the farmer. "They held a grudge
agin me, an' they thought they was a-goin' to git square. But I'll show
'em, an' don't you forgit it!"

"We didn't shoot his cows!" came simultaneously from Jack and Fred.

"Bad business! But I've got to be on my way," commented the carrier.
"That road bein' closed puts me away off my regular route;" and off he
drove.

Three quarters of the distance to Haven Point had been covered when
those in the wagon heard a shout, and a moment later Captain Dale came
galloping up on horseback.

"Where in the world have you two cadets been?" he cried. "We have been
looking all over for you."

"We got lost in the woods and had to camp out all night," explained
Jack, and then added: "Did the others get back?"

"Oh, yes. And they fully expected that you would follow them." And
then, seeing a peculiar look on the boys' faces, the military
instructor of Colby Hall continued: "Nothing wrong, I hope?"

"Yes, there is--a whole lot wrong!" cried Elias Lacy, before the cadets
could answer. "They sneaked up to my farm an' shot two o' my cows."

"Impossible!" exclaimed the military man.

"No, it ain't! It's so!" shrilled the old farmer. "They killed the
cows, an' I'm on my way to put 'em in the Haven Point lock-up."

"Oh, Captain Dale, don't let him have us arrested!" pleaded Fred. "We
do not know anything about his cows, and we certainly did not shoot
them."

"Tell me all about this," demanded Captain Dale. And in a highly
excited fashion, Elias Lacy told his story, which was corroborated by
his hired man.

"Now I'll hear what you have to say," said the captain, turning to Jack
and Fred.

They gave him the particulars of what had happened, just as they had
already related them to the old farmer. Then Captain Dale asked them a
number of questions. Elias Lacy interrupted continually.

"I ain't a-goin' to stand no nonsense," said the old man doggedly. "I'm
a-goin' to put 'em in the lock-up, an' do it right now!"

"Mr. Lacy, allow me to tell you something," said the military
instructor coolly. "If these boys are guilty you will be justified in
having them placed under arrest. But if they are not guilty--and they
claim they are innocent--you'll make yourself liable for a big suit for
damages."

"I don't care! I know they shot them cows!"

"No, you don't know it. You admit that the farm hand who saw the two
cadets did not recognize them. In fact, he wasn't altogether sure that
they were cadets. Now, these boys claim they were nowhere near your
pasture lot when the cows were shot. I think the best thing you can do
is to let them return to the Hall with me. Colonel Colby is away
to-day, but I will take the matter up with him just as soon as he
returns."

"Mebbe if I let 'em go to the Hall, they'll run away," answered Elias
Lacy. The mention of a possible lawsuit for damages had taken some of
the aggressiveness out of him.

"I will see to it that they do not run away," answered Captain Dale.
"We have a guardroom at the Hall--a sort of lock-up; and if it is
necessary I will have them placed there until Colonel Colby can
investigate, and until you can make up your mind what you want to do."

The old farmer argued the matter for several minutes, but in the end
agreed to let the military instructor take charge of Jack and Fred.

"But remember," he said in parting, "you've got to keep 'em under lock
an' key till I see Colonel Colby. I'm a-goin' to make an investigation,
an' I'm purty sure I'll be able to prove that they killed them cows."




CHAPTER XXVIII

IN THE GUARDROOM


"What in the world do you suppose has become of them, Randy?"

"I give it up! I hope they only lost their way and didn't have some
kind of an accident."

"Oh, don't speak of an accident!" cried Andy in horror. "It makes me
shiver to think of it."

"I can't understand why they didn't rejoin us as they promised to do,"
said Frank Newberry, who was present. "We looked all over for them, and
fired one or two shots to attract their attention, but it was all
useless."

The twins had passed a restless night following the continued absence
from the school of their cousins. Early in the morning they had gone
out in company with Gif and Spouter, and covered many miles in a vain
search for the absent ones. They could not settle down to their class
work, and so were excused by Professor Brice.

"Well, I've got to be getting back to the classroom," remarked Frank
Newberry, presently, and he and several others who were present hurried
away, leaving the twins to themselves.

The boys walked down the roadway which had been followed by the hunters
the day before. They had covered only a short distance when they saw a
farm wagon approaching, with Captain Dale beside it on his horse.

"There they are!" cried Andy, and an instant later added in amazement:
"Old Lacy and one of his men are with them!"

"Yes. And I bet that spells trouble for Jack and Fred," announced his
brother.

The old farmer would not stop for the boys on the roadside, but drove
directly to the Colby Hall entrance.

"Why! what's the matter?" exclaimed Randy to the military instructor.

"A little trouble, boys," was Captain Dale's answer. "You'll hear about
it later." And then he went after the wagon, and the boys took to their
heels and followed.

"Now then, you do what you promised!" snapped Elias Lacy, after Jack
and Fred had jumped from the wagon. "Don't let 'em run away, nohow!"

"You can rest assured that I will take care of them, Mr. Lacy,"
answered the captain coldly.

"When do you expect Colonel Colby back?"

"Some time this afternoon."

"Then I guess I'll be back by that time to see him. An' I guess I'll be
able to prove them boys is guilty, too."

"Why, Jack! what is it all about?" demanded Randy, while his twin
looked on questioningly. The boys' shotguns and game had been taken
from the farm wagon, and now the pair from the Lacy farm drove away.

"You've got to search me!" declared Jack. "Old Lacy accuses Fred and me
of shooting two of his cows."

"You didn't do it, though, did you?" queried Andy.

"Certainly not!" burst out Fred. "All we know about it is what he has
told us. We weren't even near the pasture where the cows were kept."

As well as they were able, Jack and Fred explained the situation to
their cousins and also answered a number of questions put to them by
Captain Dale. The military instructor was much puzzled over the
situation, and hardly knew what to do.

"You heard what I promised Mr. Lacy," he said finally. "I'll have to
place you in the guardroom until Colonel Colby gets back. But I imagine
you would rather be kept there than let Mr. Lacy take you down to the
town lock-up."

"It isn't fair to lock us up at all," grumbled Fred. "We have done no
wrong. Of course we stayed away from the Hall over night, but that
couldn't be helped. It was no fun staying outdoors on such a cold night
without shelter."

"Can't you parole us, Captain?" queried Jack.

"No. I gave Mr. Lacy my word that I would lock you up, and I'll have to
do it. I'll see to it, however, that you suffer no discomforts while
you are in the guardroom."

After this there seemed no help for it, and, turning their guns and
game over to the twins, Jack and Fred followed Captain Dale through one
of the lower corridors and then into a wing of the building. Here there
was a room about twelve feet square, the one window of which was
barred, and this was known officially as the school guardroom, or
prison.

"You may wash up if you care to do so, and I will send you some
breakfast," announced Captain Dale, and then left them in the room,
locking the door behind him.

The apartment was but scantily furnished, containing an iron cot, a
couple of stools, a table, and, in one corner, a wash bowl with running
water. There was a small steam radiator in the room, and this the boys
lost no time in turning on, for the air was damp and cold.

"This is a fine prospect, truly," remarked Fred, as he sank down on one
of the stools. "I wonder how long we'll have to stay in this hole."

"That remains to be seen, Fred. I wish Colonel Colby were here. I think
he would give us some good advice--being such an old friend of our
fathers."

"Gee! I'd hate to have him send a letter home telling the folks that we
were guilty of shooting a farmer's cows."

"So would I. I don't see how we are going to clear ourselves. You can
bet Lacy will make out the blackest possible case against us."

After their outing in the woods the boys were glad enough to wash
themselves. They had hardly finished when one of the waiters of the
Hall came in with a large tray filled with an appetizing breakfast.

"This isn't so bad," declared Jack, when they had been left once more
alone. The boys ate heartily, yet they were so much troubled that it is
not likely the food did them any good.

The report soon circulated throughout Colby Hall that Jack and Fred had
been placed under arrest, and many of the cadets wanted to know what it
meant.

"They've been arrested for shooting two of old Lacy's cows!" said
Codfish, who had heard the news and had started to circulate it as
quickly as possible. "They say old Lacy is going to send them to
state's prison for it."

"Spikeless mosquitoes!" cried Fatty. "Do you think they really went
over there and shot the cows?"

"I don't know, I'm sure," answered Walt Baxter, who was present. "I
know they didn't bear old Lacy much good-will. They felt rather raw
over the way the old man held 'em up with his shotgun when they were
having their Hallowe'en fun."

"Yes. And they were down on Lacy because he once took away some
chestnuts they had gathered from one of his trees," put in another
cadet.

"Shooting cows is rather a serious business," was Bart White's comment.

This talk took place on the campus. Down in the gymnasium another group
of cadets had gathered, including Nappy Martell and Slugger Brown.

"Locked up for killing old Lacy's cows, eh?" cried Martell, with a
satisfied grin on his face. "They'll catch it for that, all right
enough!"

"I don't see why Colonel Colby don't fire 'em out of the school for
it," said Slugger Brown.

"Maybe he will dismiss 'em if he finds out the report is true,"
ventured another cadet.

"Of course the report is true!" put in Codfish, who had come up.
"Didn't one of the hired men see 'em do it?"

"Is that so, Codfish?"

"So they say."

"Oh, it would be just like those Rovers to do something like that,"
came from Nappy Martell. "They are that kind of fellows."

"I always thought they were pretty good chaps," was the comment of
another cadet.

"Good chaps!" sneered Slugger Brown. "That shows you don't know 'em as
well as we do. They are sneaks--all of 'em--and wouldn't hesitate a
minute to do anything underhanded. I hope Colonel Colby gets after them
and fires 'em out;" and then, with a knowing look at Martell, Slugger
passed on, and presently his crony followed him.

A good deal of this talk drifted to the ears of the Rover twins and
hurt them not a little. But they were in no position to combat what was
said.

"Of course we know Jack and Fred are innocent," remarked Randy to his
brother. "But in a court of law it is one thing to know it and quite
another thing to prove it."

"Yet I've always heard it said that a man was innocent until he was
proved guilty," asserted Andy.

"Very true. Just the same, many a man has been convicted on what they
call circumstantial evidence; and evidently the circumstantial evidence
against Jack and Fred is pretty strong."

In the guardroom the time for Jack and Fred passed slowly. They
discussed the situation from every possible point of view, but without
arriving at any satisfactory conclusion.

"Even if they don't send us to prison for the crime, they may make our
fathers' pay for the cows," said Jack.

"Yes. And Colonel Colby may send us home," added Fred, dismally. "Oh,
dear! wouldn't that be the worst ever?" and he sank down on the cot and
covered his face with his hands.

It was Martell and Brown, aided by Codfish, who saw to it that the
report of Jack and Fred's arrest was carried to Clearwater Hall. This
brought consternation to the girls, particularly to Ruth and May.

"I won't believe it!" declared Ruth. "I don't believe Jack and Fred
would be so mean."

"I don't believe it either!" cried Spouter's cousin. "Somebody else
must have done it!"

In the middle of the afternoon Colonel Colby returned to the Hall and
was at once acquainted with the affair by Captain Dale. The colonel was
on the point of questioning the two prisoners when a servant came in,
announcing the arrival of Elias Lacy. The farmer was as wildly excited
as he had been in the morning.

"I knowed I was right!" he cried, flourishing a letter in the colonel's
face. "Here's something I got to prove it! It come by mail this mornin'
when I was bringin' them young whelps over here. I put the letter in my
pocket, an' I forgot all about it until an hour ago. Jest read that,
will you?" and he thrust the communication into Colonel Colby's hand.

The letter was postmarked at Beach Haven, and had been mailed the
evening previous. It was written in a slanting backhand, evidently
disguised, and ran as follows:

    "Dear Mr. Lacy:

    "Your two cows were shot by Jack Rover and Fred Rover. They were
    out in the woods hunting when we saw them go towards your pasture
    lot. We thought they were up to some trick, so watched them. They
    drove the two cows from the rest of the herd, and then Jack Rover
    gave one cow two shots and Fred Rover gave the other cow two shots.
    Then they ran back into the woods as tight as they could go. They
    didn't join the other hunters they had gone out with, most likely
    because they were afraid.

    "You had better go to Colby Hall and have them arrested before they
    run away.

    "Yours truly,

    "Three boys who know, but who do not dare to give you their names."




CHAPTER XXIX

THE EXPOSURE


"There! what do you think of that letter?" demanded Elias Lacy, after
Colonel Colby had read the communication.

"I don't know what to think of it, Mr. Lacy," was the slow reply. "I
have not yet had an opportunity to interview the two Rovers. If you
will sit down here in my office, I'll talk to them and try to settle
this matter with you."

"Don't you want me to go with you?" questioned the old farmer quickly.

"No. I prefer to interview them alone."

"All right then, I'll stay here. But don't be too long, 'cause I want
to drive down to the town an' git Bill Pixley, the chief o' police, or
one of his men."

"I don't think you'll need any police, Mr. Lacy. I think we'll be able
to fix this matter up to your entire satisfaction," answered Colonel
Colby; and then left the office and made his way along the corridors to
the guardroom.

His coming was a great relief to Jack and Fred, for they felt that in
Colonel Colby they had a real friend. Yet they were much troubled, for
they realized that the case looked black against them.

"Now tell me everything you know. Don't hold back a single item," said
the colonel, as he seated himself on one of the stools.

Thereupon both cadets related their story in detail--how they had gone
out with Frank Newberry and the others, how the two parties had become
separated, and how they had lost their way, camped out over night, and
finally found the woods road leading down to the Lacy farm, and then
how Elias Lacy and his hired man had held them up and threatened them
with arrest.

"And you do not know a single thing about the shooting of the cows?"
questioned the colonel, eyeing them sternly.

"Not a thing, sir," responded Jack, promptly.

"We don't know anything more about those cows than you do, sir," added
Fred, vehemently. "We weren't anywhere near his place when they were
shot."

"Then what do you two say to this letter?" continued the master of
Colby Hall, and presented the communication to them.

Jack read the letter with Fred looking over his shoulder. Then, of a
sudden, Fred gave a cry of amazement.

"I think I know who wrote that letter!" he exclaimed.

"You do!" returned Colonel Colby and Jack, simultaneously.

"I think so; although, of course, I am not sure." Fred looked at his
cousin. "It would be just like him to do it."

"Who are you talking about, Fred?"

"I'm talking about Slugger Brown."

"Slugger Brown!"

"Do you mean Slogwell Brown?" queried the master of the school.

"Yes, sir."

"And what makes you think Brown wrote that communication?" demanded
Colonel Colby. And now, somewhat to their wonder, the Rovers realized
that the colonel seemed to be unusually interested.

"Because I once saw Brown writing in backhand fashion on the blackboard
in the gymnasium," explained Fred. "He wrote a hand almost identical
with that. I noticed it particularly, because he was amusing himself by
writing one line slanting backward and the next line slanting forward."

"Did he know you were watching him?"

"Oh, no! I didn't stay there long enough for that. He was all alone,
and as I didn't care to speak to him, I passed out without his noticing
it."

"How long ago was this?"

"Only about a week ago."

"Hum!" The colonel mused for a moment, knitting his brows closely as he
did so. "That is worth investigating." He thought for another moment.
"You have nothing more to add to your story?"

"No, sir," answered Fred.

"I think we've told you everything, Colonel Colby," returned Jack. "We
are innocent, and I trust you will do all you can to help us prove it."

"I shall do what is absolutely fair in the matter," answered Colonel
Colby; and then left the two boys once more to themselves.

Andy and Randy had begged for permission to talk things over with their
cousins, and they came in to see Jack and Fred almost immediately after
Colonel Colby left.

"If Slugger Brown wrote that letter, maybe he and Nappy Martell did the
shooting," remarked Randy.

"They would be just mean enough to do it," added his twin. "They'd do
anything to get our crowd into trouble."

"Why can't you two fellows watch Brown and Martell?" questioned Jack.
"You might tell Gif and Spouter and Ned about it, too. Find out where
those two fellows were yesterday afternoon, and find out if they used
any of the shotguns."

"Say! that's an idea!" cried Randy, enthusiastically. "I'll go at it
right away!"

"And so will I!" declared his brother. "Maybe we'll be able to lay the
whole blame on that pair."

The twins talked it over with the others for a little while longer, and
then were let out of the guardroom by a servant, who locked the door
after them. As they came out into the main corridor of the Hall, they
saw that Elias Lacy was just leaving Colonel Colby's office.

"All right, then, I'll wait," the old farmer was saying. "But I'll be
back by to-morrow afternoon, an' if you can't prove by that time that
them Rover boys is innercent, I'm a-goin' to have 'em locked up."

"Very well, Mr. Lacy," the colonel replied, and bowed his visitor out
of the door.

"Well, anyway, the colonel has got old Lacy to wait another day,"
whispered Randy. "That will give us just so much more time to get on
the track of what Martell and Brown have been doing."

"All provided they are really guilty of playing this dirty trick,"
answered his brother.

In the upper hallway the twins ran across Ned Lowe, and immediately
took that cadet into their confidence, and asked him if he would not
try to find out for them where Brown and Martell had been the previous
afternoon.

"For, you see, we can't ask them ourselves," explained Randy. "If we
did that they would become suspicious at once."

"All right, I'll do what I can," answered Ned, and made off without
delay. He came back in less than fifteen minutes, looking much excited.

"How did you make out?" queried Randy, eagerly.

"Great! I want you two fellows to come upstairs at once while Brown and
Martell are out of their rooms. And I think you had better bring along
one of the teachers as a witness."

"Why, what have you learned, Ned?" questioned Andy.

"I saw them down near the gymnasium, and sneaked up behind them, and by
rare good luck heard them talking about two shotguns that belonged in
the gun rack. They were wondering how they could get them from their
rooms back into the gun rack without detection."

"Hurrah! I wager we have found 'em out!" ejaculated Randy, excitedly.
"Come on! let's get one of the teachers at once!"

The boys were fortunate enough to fall in with Professor Brice a minute
later, and in a rather excited fashion they told the teacher of what
they had learned and what they proposed to do.

"Why, certainly, I'll go with you," said Paul Brice, quickly. "I want
just as much as anybody to get at the bottom of this affair."

Accompanied by the professor, the three cadets hurried to the second
floor of the Hall and then to the rooms occupied by Slugger Brown and
Nappy Martell. The door to each was locked, but one of them was opened
for the crowd by an assistant janitor. A hasty search revealed nothing
in the shape of a firearm in either room, and the Rover boys were much
disappointed. But then Randy thought of the bed, and quickly raised the
mattress. On the springs rested a shotgun.

"And I'll bet the other shotgun is in the other bed!" cried Andy, and
he and the professor made an investigation. The fun-loving Rover's
surmise was correct.

"These are guns belonging to the Hall, too!" cried Ned, pointing out
the mark of the school on the stocks. "They must belong down in the gun
rack, just as Slugger and Martell said."

"Bring those guns along, boys, and we'll go directly to Colonel Colby's
office," said Professor Brice; and the cadets lost no time in doing as
he directed.

They found the master of the school seated at his desk, looking over a
mass of papers. He gazed in wonder at the three lads and Professor
Brice.

"We found the shotguns that were used on those cows!" cried Randy, his
eyes sparkling.

"And do you know where we found 'em? In the beds that Slugger Brown and
Nappy Martell use!" broke in Andy.

"What's this?" And now the colonel was really startled.

"You had better let the boys tell the beginning of the story, and I
will tell the end," said Professor Brice.

Thereupon, the two Rovers repeated the talk that had taken place in the
guardroom, and then told how they had gotten Ned to spy on Brown and
Martell. Then Ned told of what he had heard, and of how the three had
called on Professor Brice for assistance. After that the teacher took
up the narrative, ending with the finding of the shotguns in the beds.

"It looks like a pretty clear case against Brown and Martell," remarked
the colonel slowly. "However, I shall have to make a further
investigation. I will send for Brown and Martell at once."

The colonel was as good as his word, and inside of five minutes Slugger
and Nappy came into the office together. They looked much disturbed,
and this look increased when they saw Andy and Randy.

"Brown and Martell, I have sent for you to answer a few questions,"
began Colonel Colby, sternly, as the two cadets faced him. "I want you
to answer me directly and truthfully. What was your object in taking
two of our shotguns from the gun rack and going over to Mr. Lacy's farm
and shooting down two of his cows?"

"Wh--wh--why, wh--wh--what do you mean?" faltered Brown.

"We didn't--er--shoot--er--any cows," stammered Martell.

Both boys were thrown into utter confusion, and showed it plainly. Then
Slugger Brown suddenly turned to glare at the Rovers.

"Is this some of your work?" he demanded. "If it is, let me tell you
I'll pay you back for it!"

"Stop that talk, Brown!" commanded Colonel Colby. "I want you and
Martell to answer my question. Why did you go over there and shoot
those cows?"

"Who says we shot the cows?" questioned Nappy, faintly.

"Never mind who says so. You did it, and it is useless for you to deny
it. Here are the two guns you took from the gun rack and afterwards hid
in your beds. And here is the despicable note you, Brown, wrote and
mailed to Mr. Lacy," and the colonel held out the communication.

"Oh, Colonel Colby, I di--di--didn't do it!" faltered Slugger Brown.
His face had suddenly gone white, and he could scarcely speak.

"Do you deny that this is your handwriting?"

"I--I----Oh, is----I--I--didn't----That is----" and here Slugger Brown
broke down absolutely, not knowing what to say.

"Did you mail that letter or did Brown do it?" questioned the colonel,
quickly turning to Martell.

"He did it! I didn't have anything to do with it!" burst out Nappy,
breaking down completely.

"It ain't so!" cried Slugger. "He was with me, and he dropped the
letter in the post-office!"

"And so you killed the cows to get the Rovers into trouble?" said
Colonel Colby; and now his eyes glittered like steel. "A fine thing to
do, truly! I did not think any of our cadets would stoop to such a base
action."

"It was a--er--a joke," gasped Nappy.

"A joke! To kill two valuable cows? Martell, if you talk that way, I'll
be inclined to think you are losing your senses. But evidently there is
something radically wrong with both you and Brown," went on the master
of the Hall. "This case of the cows and the plot against the Rovers is
bad enough, but I have another matter against you which may prove even
worse."

"What is that?" questioned Slugger, very faintly.

"It is a case that Captain Larkins of the steam tug, _Mary D._, has
lodged against you. He says he has absolute proof that both of you went
out in a motor boat one day and tampered with the towing line and the
chains of a large lumber raft, so that when a sudden squall came up on
the lake, the towing line parted and the lumber raft went to pieces."

"Oh, say! that must have been the squall we were out in!" exclaimed
Randy. "And we got caught among that floating lumber, too!"

"Yes, that was the time," answered Colonel Colby.

"Oh, Colonel! can't we go to our cousins and tell them that they can
have their freedom?" questioned Andy, with a sudden thought of those
left in the guardroom.

"Yes, Rover. Both of you and also Lowe can go," was the colonel's
reply. "I will settle this affair with Brown and Martell."

"And will you settle it with Mr. Lacy, too?" queried Randy, quickly.

"Yes. I will fix the whole matter up. You may tell Jack and Fred that
they need not worry any further on this score." And thereupon Andy,
Randy and Ned hurried away to bear the glad tidings to the prisoners.

Of course Jack and Fred were greatly pleased to be released. They
listened eagerly to all the twins and Ned had to relate.

"So Nappy and Slugger are guilty!" cried Jack. "What a mean way to
act!"

"And to think they are also guilty of sending that lumber adrift," said
Fred. "They'll suffer for that."

"They ought to suffer," answered his cousin.




CHAPTER XXX

A FOOTBALL VICTORY--CONCLUSION


"Whoop her up for Colby Hall!"

"This is the time Columbus Academy wins!"

"Not on your life! This is Colby Hall day!"

"You'll sing a different tune after the game is over!"

"Hurrah! here come the elevens now!"

And then a wild shouting, intermingled with the tooting of horns and
the sounding of rattles, rent the air, while banners went waving on
every side.

It was the day of the great game between Colby Hall and Columbus
Academy. It had been decided that the contest should take place on the
field belonging to the military academy, and once again everything had
been put in the best of order for this gala occasion. The grandstand
and the bleachers were overflowing with spectators, and in a distant
field were parked a hundred automobiles or more, while in another field
were numerous carriages and farm wagons.

"We've certainly got a crowd to-day," remarked Randy, who, with his
brother, was in the section of the stand reserved for the Colbyites and
their friends. In front of the twins and their chums sat Ruth, May, and
half a dozen other girls from Clearwater Hall.

"I don't see anything of Nappy Martell or Slugger Brown," remarked Ida
Brierley, who was with the girls.

"I hope you don't want to see them, Ida," returned Ruth, promptly.

"Indeed, I do not!" answered the other girl. "I was only wondering what
had become of them."

"Jack told me they had both left the Hall for the term. They shot those
cows, you know, and they had some other trouble which was hushed up."

"Oh, that was the trouble over that lumber raft," put in Jennie Mason.

"Right you are!" answered Andy, bending over and speaking in a low tone
so that no outsider might hear. "Their folks had to pony up a pretty
penny, too, for the lumber and for the cows."

"Oh, well, let's forget Martell and Brown," broke in May. "I want to
enjoy this game."

"And that's what we all want to do," said Alice Strobell.

What had been said concerning Slugger Brown and Nappy Martell was true.
Questioned by Colonel Colby, the two misguided cadets had finally
broken down utterly and confessed everything, telling how they had once
gotten into a quarrel with Captain Larkins on the lake and how they had
sought to get square by tampering with the fastenings of the lumber
raft and the towline; and they had also related the particulars of how
they had watched Jack and Fred go out shooting and had then purloined
the two shotguns from the gun rack and hurried over to the Lacy farm to
shoot the cows. Mr. Brown and Mr. Martell had been called upon to pay
both the lake captain and the old farmer heavy damages; and thereupon
they had withdrawn their sons from the Hall for the time being.

"And I'm glad they're gone," had been Fred's comment. "I hope they
never come back here again."

"Yes, we could do without Brown and Martell very well," had been Jack's
answer.

Both of the cousins were particularly happy on this day. Jack occupied
his former position on the eleven, and Fred had been drafted from the
scrub team and put on the substitutes' bench in place of Brown.

"Maybe I'll get a chance to play!" cried the youngest Rover eagerly,
when the football captain brought him the news.

"Perhaps so, Fred," answered Gif. "Although, of course, I hope none of
our players get hurt."

As the Colby Hall eleven marched out on the gridiron, Jack glanced
towards the grandstand and caught Ruth's eye. The girl gaily waved a
Colby Hall banner at him. Then May caught sight of Fred on the side
lines, and shook her hand at him.

Spectators from the town were almost as much interested in the contest
as were the two schools. This football game was always the big match of
the season, and many wagers were placed on the result. In the past the
contests had always been exceedingly bitter, with the various scores
almost a tie, Columbus Academy winning by a narrow margin one year and
Colby Hall taking the lead by an equally narrow margin the following
year.

When the Columbus Academy boys came out on the field, it was seen that
they were good, husky fellows, every bit as heavy as the Colby Hall
eleven. They looked in the pink of condition.

"I am afraid our boys will have their work cut out for them in this
game," remarked Mr. Crews to Colonel Colby.

"Well, our boys look pretty fit," answered the master of the Hall.

By the toss of a coin, Columbus Academy won the choice of position, and
took the west goal, the slight wind that was blowing being in their
favor. Then the two teams lined up for the kick-off.

"Now then, boys, show 'em what you can do!" yelled the Colby Hall
cadets, and then the school slogan rang out on the air.

"Put it all over 'em, boys!" yelled one of the Columbus Academy
followers. "Come on now, all together!" he added, and started up a
song, the refrain of which contained the line: "We're here to-day to
bury them!"

"What an awful song to sing!" remarked Ruth.

"Oh, you mustn't mind that," returned Andy, gaily. "He sings best who
sings last, as the cat said to the bird."

It must be confessed that both teams were rather nervous at the outset
of the contest. The play was decidedly ragged, and one or two mistakes
were made, which, however, profited neither side anything. The ball was
carried first to the Colby Hall 10-yard line, and from there it went
back to the Columbus 15-yard line, and then it sawed back and forth
until eight minutes of the first quarter had passed.

"Gee! this begins to look like a blank," was Spouter's comment.

"So it does," returned Dan Soppinger. "Say! can any of you tell me why
the----"

"Don't ask questions now, Dan," interrupted Randy. "Oh, look! look!" he
burst out suddenly. "Isn't that great!"

The ball had dribbled back and forth until, by a punt, it reached Colby
Hall's 20-yard line. It landed close to Jack, and like a flash he
gathered it to his breast and started for the Columbus goal.

"Go it, Rover! go it!"

"Don't let 'em down you, Jack!"

With his friends cheering lustily, Jack sped on, dodging many
straight-arm tackles, and skipping from right to left and then back
again in order to avoid the numerous players who seemed to confront him
as if by magic. Then somebody appeared on his left, and the next moment
he went down with a thud, not knowing where he had landed.

"It's a touchdown!" was the cry, and then the Colby Hall followers went
wild with delight, while Columbus Academy was mute. The girls stood up
in the grandstand and waved their banners gaily.

"Oh, just to think, Jack did it!" murmured Ruth, and her face showed
her intense satisfaction.

"Now if only Walt Baxter can kick a goal!" cried Randy.

But this was not to be, for at the moment the leather sailed through
the air, a strong puff of wind came up and the ball went just outside
the posts.

"Well, never mind," cried Randy, consolingly; "that puts us in the
lead."

The run had somewhat exhausted Jack, but still he insisted upon keeping
on playing, and after the wonderful exhibition he had made, Gif had not
the heart to call in a substitute to take his place.

But if, with a touchdown in their favor, Colby thought to remain in the
lead, they soon had this hope shattered. The Columbus Academy eleven
played a fast and snappy second quarter, and, as a result, before it
was half over they took the ball on a fumble and circled the left end
for twelve yards.

"Say, that's going some," remarked Fatty.

"Oh, it won't net them anything," responded Andy.

But in this he was wrong, for on the next two plays Columbus carried
the ball over the line for a touchdown.

"A tie! A tie!" yelled the followers of the Academy.

"Now then, boys, don't miss the goal!"

"It isn't likely they'll miss it," grumbled Andy. "The wind is in their
favor." The goal was kicked with ease, and then the score stood:
Columbus Academy--7, Colby Hall--6.

During the intermission between the second and third quarters, Gif and
Mr. Crews gave the eleven some very pointed instructions. One player
had hurt his ankle slightly, and he was taken out and a substitute took
his place. But the substitute was not Fred, much to that youth's
disappointment.

If the first and second quarters had been fast and snappy, the third
quarter was even more so. Back and forth went the ball, and it was lost
both by Colby Hall and by the Academy team. There were some really fine
tackles and splendid runs, but all of these availed nothing. And when
the whistle blew the score still stood 6 for Colby Hall as against 7
for Columbus Academy.

"Tough luck!" groaned Ned.

"Oh, we're going to win--I'm sure of it!" answered Randy.

"I hope what you say proves true," returned Ruth, hopefully.

Just before the whistle was given for the end of the third quarter
there had been a grand crash and a fierce mix-up on the field. Then it
was found that both a Columbus Academy player and a Colby Hall youth
would have to be taken out of the game.

"Now then, Fred, here's your chance," said Gif, coming up to the
youngest Rover. "I'm going to put you in, and I want you to help us win
the game."

"Win it is!" cried Fred, his eyes shining eagerly. "We'll either win or
we'll die!"

When the whistle blew for the final quarter, all of the players who
trooped on the field had a do-or-die expression on their faces. Once
more the play became fast and furious, and, as a result, in less than
three minutes Columbus Academy scored another touchdown, which,
however, failed of a goal.

"Hurrah! That's the way to do it!" yelled their followers in keen
delight.

"Brace up, boys! brace up! This won't do at all. Come on now, all
together!" And then Colby Hall went in with renewed vigor so that
inside of a few minutes more they, too, had scored another touchdown,
and from this they managed to kick a goal.

"Hello! what do you know about that! Another tie!"

"Thirteen to thirteen! Same as that other game! Say, this is getting
mighty interesting!"

So far, Fred, although he had played as hard as anybody in the game,
had failed to make any appreciable showing. Now, however, with only a
few minutes to spare, he saw his chance.

One of the Columbus Academy players had dropped back for a punt. Fred,
who was close at hand, made a sudden leap over a protecting half back
and blocked the kick.

"Say, look at that! Fred Rover is in the game for keeps!"

"Send it back, Fred! Send it back!"

The words were scarcely spoken when the thrilled spectators saw that
the youngest Rover boy had the leather. Like a flash he sent it rolling
back, Gif coming to his aid.

"A safety! A safety for Colby Hall!"

"Hurrah! that puts Colby two points ahead!"

"Good work for Fred Rover!"

"Now then, Colby Hall, you've got 'em a-going! Keep it up!"

"Pitch into 'em, Columbus! Pitch into 'em!"

So the yelling went on while all of the spectators stood up in their
seats, anxious to see what might be accomplished next. But there was no
time to do more. The whistle blew and the great game was over.

Colby Hall had won!

In a twinkling the huge field was covered with spectators running in
all directions, and the victorious eleven was surrounded. Many were the
congratulations showered on all the players, and it may well be
believed that Jack and Fred came in for their full share.

"The finest game I ever saw," declared Colonel Colby, as he shook hands
with all his youthful players.

"Oh, Jack! It was simply grand--that run you made!" exclaimed Ruth,
when she saw him.

"Yes. And the way you played for that safety!" put in May to Fred.

Columbus Academy was much disheartened over its defeat, yet it cheered
the victors and was cheered in return; and then the great crowd
gradually dispersed.

"Bonfire to-night, boys! And a big one, too!" cried Andy, as he rushed
up to fairly embrace both his cousins. Then, to work off some of his
high spirits, the acrobatic youth turned several cartwheels and
handsprings.

"What a pity our folks weren't here to see this game," said Jack,
wistfully.

"Never mind, we'll write them all the particulars," announced Randy.
"And we'll send them copies of the local paper, too. That will have a
full account of it," and this was done as soon as possible.

After the game refreshments were served to the cadets and their
particular friends, and in this, of course, the Rovers and the girls
from Clearwater Hall joined. Then the boys took the girls back to their
school in an automobile.

"We are certainly having one dandy time at this school," remarked Fred,
on the way back to Colby Hall.

"Right you are!" answered Randy.

"If only we hadn't had that trouble with Slugger and Nappy," remarked
Jack.

"Oh, don't bother about those fellows!" cried Andy. "I don't believe
they'll ever trouble any of us again."

But in this he was mistaken. Brown and Martell did trouble them, and in
what manner will be related in the next volume of this series, to be
entitled: "The Rover Boys on Snowshoe Island; or, The Old Lumberman's
Treasure Box."

In that volume we shall meet all the boys and their chums again, and
also learn the particulars of a queer mystery, and also of a great joke
played upon Professor Asa Lemm.

The cadets of Colby Hall were a happy crowd that night. A great bonfire
blazed along the bank of the river, and around this the boys cut up to
their hearts' content. Then they marched around and around the Hall,
singing loudly.

"It's certainly a dandy school, isn't it?" remarked Jack to his
cousins.

"The best ever!" they answered in a chorus. And here for the present we
will leave the Rover boys and say good-bye.


THE END




This Isn't All!

Would you like to know what became of the good friends you have made in
this book?

Would you like to read other stories continuing their adventures and
experiences, or other books quite as entertaining by the same author?

On the _reverse side_ of the wrapper which comes with this book, you
will find a wonderful list of stories which you can buy at the same
store where you got this book.

Don't throw away the Wrapper

_Use it as a handy catalog of the books you want some day to have.
But in case you do mislay it, write to the Publishers for a complete
catalog._




THE HARDY BOYS SERIES

By FRANKLIN W. DIXON

Illustrated. Every Volume Complete in Itself

The Hardy Boys are sons of a celebrated American detective, and during
vacations and their off time from school they help their father by
hunting down clues themselves.


THE TOWER TREASURE--A dying criminal confessed that his loot had been
secreted "in the tower." It remained for the Hardy Boys to clear up the
mystery.

THE HOUSE ON THE CLIFF--Mr. Hardy started to investigate--and
disappeared! An odd tale, with plenty of excitement.

THE SECRET OF THE OLD MILL--Counterfeit money was in circulation, and
the limit was reached when Mrs. Hardy took some from a stranger. A tale
full of thrills.

THE MISSING CHUMS--Two of the Hardy Boys' chums disappear and are
almost rescued by their friends when all are captured. A thrilling
story of adventure.

HUNTING FOR HIDDEN GOLD--In tracing some stolen gold the trail leads
the boys to an abandoned mine, and there things start to happen.

THE SHORE ROAD MYSTERY--Automobiles were disappearing most mysteriously
from the Shore Road. It remained for the Hardy Boys to solve the
mystery.

THE SECRET OF THE CAVES--When the boys reached the caves they came
unexpectedly upon a queer old hermit.

THE MYSTERY OF CABIN ISLAND--A story of queer adventures on a rockbound
island.

THE GREAT AIRPORT MYSTERY--The Hardy Boys solve the mystery of the
disappearance of some valuable mail.

WHAT HAPPENED AT MIDNIGHT--The boys follow a trail that ends in a
strange and exciting situation.

WHILE THE CLOCK TICKED--The Hardy Boys aid in vindicating a man who has
been wrongly accused of a crime.

FOOTPRINTS UNDER THE WINDOW--The Smuggling of Chinese into this country
is the basis of this story in which the boys find thrills and
excitement aplenty.


GROSSET & DUNLAP, Publishers, NEW YORK




TED SCOTT FLYING STORIES

By FRANKLIN W. DIXON

Illustrated. Each Volume Complete in Itself.

No subject has so thoroughly caught the imagination of young America as
aviation. This series has been inspired by recent daring feats of the
air, and is dedicated to Lindbergh, Byrd, Chamberlin and other heroes
of the skies.


OVER THE OCEAN TO PARIS;
_or, Ted Scott's Daring Long Distance Flight._

RESCUED IN THE CLOUDS;
_or, Ted Scott, Hero of the Air._

OVER THE ROCKIES WITH THE AIR MAIL;
_or, Ted Scott Lost in the Wilderness._

FIRST STOP HONOLULU;
_or, Ted Scott Over the Pacific._

THE SEARCH FOR THE LOST FLYERS;
_or, Ted Scott Over the West Indies._

SOUTH OF THE RIO GRANDE;
_or, Ted Scott On a Secret Mission._

ACROSS THE PACIFIC;
_or, Ted Scott's Hop to Australia._

THE LONE EAGLE OF THE BORDER;
_or, Ted Scott and the Diamond Smugglers._

FLYING AGAINST TIME;
_or, Breaking the Ocean to Ocean Record._

OVER THE JUNGLE TRAILS;
_or, Ted Scott and the Missing Explorers._

LOST AT THE SOUTH POLE;
_or, Ted Scott in Blizzard Land._

THROUGH THE AIR TO ALASKA;
_or, Ted Scott's Search in Nugget Valley._

FLYING TO THE RESCUE;
_or, Ted Scott and the Big Dirigible._

DANGER TRAILS OF THE SKY;
_or, Ted Scott's Great Mountain Climb._

FOLLOWING THE SUN SHADOW;
_or, Ted Scott and the Great Eclipse._

BATTLING THE WIND;
_or, Ted Scott Flying Around Cape Horn._


GROSSET & DUNLAP, Publishers, NEW YORK




THE AVIATION SERIES

By JOHN PRENTICE LANGLEY

Here is an intensely exciting series on a topic of worldwide
interest--Aviation. Every day one hears of new stunts accomplished by
pilots. With the passing of each year new records in altitude and long
distance are made. In these stories Amos Green and his chum, Danny
Cooper, accomplish all the thrilling deeds of the air that have been
done before only by hardened veterans. Moreover, backed by the
mysterious "Mr. Carstairs" they succeed in doing stunts new to the
history of aviation. You'll find them vastly exciting.


TRAIL BLAZERS OF THE SKIES

SPANNING THE PACIFIC

MASTERS THE AIR-LANES

THE PATHFINDER'S GREAT FLIGHT

AIR VOYAGERS OF THE ARCTIC

DESERT HAWKS ON THE WING

CHASING THE SETTING SUN

BRIDGING THE SEVEN SEAS

THE STAIRCASE OF THE WIND


GROSSET & DUNLAP, Publishers, NEW YORK




BOB CHASE BIG GAME SERIES

By FRANK A. WARNER

In these thrilling stories of outdoor life the hero is a young
lumberjack who is a crack rifle shot. While tracking game in the Maine
woods he does some rich hunters a great service. They become interested
in him and take him on various hunting expeditions in this country and
abroad. Bob learns what it is to face not only wildcats, foxes and deer
but also bull moose, Rocky Mountain grizzly bears and many other
species of big game.


BOB CHASE WITH THE BIG MOOSE HUNTERS

BOB CHASE AFTER GRIZZLY BEARS

BOB CHASE IN THE TIGER'S LAIR

BOB CHASE WITH THE LION HUNTERS


GROSSET & DUNLAP, Publishers, NEW YORK




BUDDY BOOKS FOR BOYS

Illustrated. Individual Colored Wrappers

Tales of Western pioneer days and the California gold fields; tales of
mystery, humor, adventure; thrilling stories of sports and aviation.
There is a wide range of subjects in this list of titles--all by
well-known authors of books for boys.


HOT DOG PARTNERS                         By William Heyliger

YOUNG EAGLE OF THE TRAIL                 By J. Allan Dunn

THE LAND OF MONSTERS                     By Harold M. Sherman

QUARTERBACK HOTHEAD                      By William Heyliger

LEFTY LEIGHTON                           By Percy Keese Fitzhugh

NUMBER 44                                By Harold M. Sherman

BILL DARROW'S VICTORY                    By William Heyliger

THE STORY OF TERRIBLE TERRY              By Percy Keese Fitzhugh

BEYOND THE DOG'S NOSE                    By Harold M. Sherman

DING PALMER, AIR DETECTIVE               By Harold M. Sherman

BEAN-BALL BILL                           By William Heyliger

CAMERON MacBAIN, BACKWOODSMAN            By Harold M. Sherman

FLYING HEELS                             By Harold M. Sherman

FLASHING STEEL                           By Harold M. Sherman

BUFFALO BOY                              By J. Allan Dunn

THE CLOUD PATROL                         By Irving Crump

SPIFFY HENSHAW                           By Percy Keese Fitzhugh

THE PILOT OF THE CLOUD PATROL            By Irving Crump

DON RADER, TRAIL BLAZER                  By Harold M. Sherman

TUCK SIMMS, FORTY-NINER                  By Edward Leonard

WIGWAG WEIGAND                           By Percy Keese Fitzhugh

HERVEY WILLETTS                          By Percy Keese Fitzhugh

SKINNY McCORD                            By Percy Keese Fitzhugh


GROSSET & DUNLAP, _Publishers_, NEW YORK




