
O'FLAHERTY V.C.: A RECRUITING PAMPHLET


By George Bernard Shaw



It may surprise some people to learn that in 1915 this little play was
a recruiting poster in disguise. The British officer seldom likes Irish
soldiers; but he always tries to have a certain proportion of them in
his battalion, because, partly from a want of common sense which leads
them to value their lives less than Englishmen do [lives are really
less worth living in a poor country], and partly because even the most
cowardly Irishman feels obliged to outdo an Englishman in bravery if
possible, and at least to set a perilous pace for him, Irish soldiers
give impetus to those military operations which require for their
spirited execution more devilment than prudence.

Unfortunately, Irish recruiting was badly bungled in 1915. The Irish
were for the most part Roman Catholics and loyal Irishmen, which means
that from the English point of view they were heretics and rebels. But
they were willing enough to go soldiering on the side of France and
see the world outside Ireland, which is a dull place to live in. It was
quite easy to enlist them by approaching them from their own point of
view. But the War Office insisted on approaching them from the point of
view of Dublin Castle. They were discouraged and repulsed by refusals to
give commissions to Roman Catholic officers, or to allow distinct
Irish units to be formed. To attract them, the walls were covered with
placards headed REMEMBER BELGIUM. The folly of asking an Irishman to
remember anything when you want him to fight for England was apparent to
everyone outside the Castle: FORGET AND FORGIVE would have been more
to the point. Remembering Belgium and its broken treaty led Irishmen to
remember Limerick and its broken treaty; and the recruiting ended in
a rebellion, in suppressing which the British artillery quite
unnecessarily reduced the centre of Dublin to ruins, and the British
commanders killed their leading prisoners of war in cold blood morning
after morning with an effect of long-drawn-out ferocity. Really it was
only the usual childish petulance in which John Bull does things in a
week that disgrace him for a century, though he soon recovers his good
humor, and cannot understand why the survivors of his wrath do not feel
as jolly with him as he does with them. On the smouldering ruins of
Dublin the appeals to remember Louvain were presently supplemented by a
fresh appeal. IRISHMEN, DO YOU WISH TO HAVE THE HORRORS OF WAR BROUGHT
TO YOUR OWN HEARTHS AND HOMES? Dublin laughed sourly.

As for me I addressed myself quite simply to the business of obtaining
recruits. I knew by personal experience and observation what anyone
might have inferred from the records of Irish emigration, that all an
Irishman's hopes and ambitions turn on his opportunities of getting out
of Ireland. Stimulate his loyalty, and he will stay in Ireland and
die for her; for, incomprehensible as it seems to an Englishman, Irish
patriotism does not take the form of devotion to England and England's
king. Appeal to his discontent, his deadly boredom, his thwarted
curiosity and desire for change and adventure, and, to escape from
Ireland, he will go abroad to risk his life for France, for the Papal
States, for secession in America, and even, if no better may be, for
England. Knowing that the ignorance and insularity of the Irishman is a
danger to himself and to his neighbors, I had no scruple in making that
appeal when there was something for him to fight which the whole world
had to fight unless it meant to come under the jack boot of the German
version of Dublin Castle.

There was another consideration, unmentionable by the recruiting
sergeants and war orators, which must nevertheless have helped them
powerfully in procuring soldiers by voluntary enlistment. The happy home
of the idealist may become common under millennial conditions. It is not
common at present. No one will ever know how many men joined the army
in 1914 and 1915 to escape from tyrants and taskmasters, termagants
and shrews, none of whom are any the less irksome when they happen
by ill-luck to be also our fathers, our mothers, our wives and our
children. Even at their amiablest, a holiday from them may be a tempting
change for all parties. That is why I did not endow O'Flaherty V.C. with
an ideal Irish colleen for his sweetheart, and gave him for his mother a
Volumnia of the potato patch rather than a affectionate parent from whom
he could not so easily have torn himself away.

I need hardly say that a play thus carefully adapted to its purpose was
voted utterly inadmissible; and in due course the British Government,
frightened out of its wits for the moment by the rout of the Fifth Army,
ordained Irish Conscription, and then did not dare to go through with
it. I still think my own line was the more businesslike. But during the
war everyone except the soldiers at the front imagined that nothing
but an extreme assertion of our most passionate prejudices, without the
smallest regard to their effect on others, could win the war. Finally
the British blockade won the war; but the wonder is that the British
blockhead did not lose it. I suppose the enemy was no wiser. War is not
a sharpener of wits; and I am afraid I gave great offence by keeping my
head in this matter of Irish recruiting. What can I do but apologize,
and publish the play now that it can no longer do any good?




O'FLAHERTY V.C.

At the door of an Irish country house in a park. Fine, summer weather;
the summer of 1916. The porch, painted white, projects into the drive:
but the door is at the side and the front has a window. The porch faces
east: and the door is in the north side of it. On the south side is a
tree in which a thrush is singing. Under the window is a garden seat
with an iron chair at each end of it.

The last four bars of God Save the King are heard in the distance,
followed by three cheers. Then the band strikes up It's a Long Way to
Tipperary and recedes until it is out of hearing.

Private O'Flaherty V.C. comes wearily southward along the drive, and
falls exhausted into the garden seat. The thrush utters a note of alarm
and flies away. The tramp of a horse is heard.

A GENTLEMAN'S VOICE. Tim! Hi! Tim! [He is heard dismounting.]

A LABORER'S VOICE. Yes, your honor.

THE GENTLEMAN'S VOICE. Take this horse to the stables, will you?

A LABORER'S VOICE. Right, your honor. Yup there. Gwan now. Gwan. [The
horse is led away.]

General Sir Pearce Madigan, an elderly baronet in khaki, beaming with
enthusiasm, arrives. O'Flaherty rises and stands at attention.

SIR PEARCE. No, no, O'Flaherty: none of that now. You're off duty.
Remember that though I am a general of forty years service, that little
Cross of yours gives you a higher rank in the roll of glory than I can
pretend to.

O'FLAHERTY [relaxing]. I'm thankful to you, Sir Pearce; but I wouldn't
have anyone think that the baronet of my native place would let a common
soldier like me sit down in his presence without leave.

SIR PEARCE. Well, you're not a common soldier, O'Flaherty: you're a very
uncommon one; and I'm proud to have you for my guest here today.

O'FLAHERTY. Sure I know, sir. You have to put up with a lot from the
like of me for the sake of the recruiting. All the quality shakes hands
with me and says they're proud to know me, just the way the king said
when he pinned the Cross on me. And it's as true as I'm standing here,
sir, the queen said to me: "I hear you were born on the estate of
General Madigan," she says; "and the General himself tells me you
were always a fine young fellow." "Bedad, Mam," I says to her, "if
the General knew all the rabbits I snared on him, and all the salmon
I snatched on him, and all the cows I milked on him, he'd think me the
finest ornament for the county jail he ever sent there for poaching."

SIR PEARCE [Laughing]. You're welcome to them all, my lad. Come [he
makes him sit down again on the garden seat]! sit down and enjoy your
holiday [he sits down on one of the iron chairs; the one at the doorless
side of the porch.]

O'FLAHERTY. Holiday, is it? I'd give five shillings to be back in the
trenches for the sake of a little rest and quiet. I never knew what hard
work was till I took to recruiting. What with the standing on my legs
all day, and the shaking hands, and the making speeches, and--what's
worse--the listening to them and the calling for cheers for king and
country, and the saluting the flag till I'm stiff with it, and the
listening to them playing God Save the King and Tipperary, and the
trying to make my eyes look moist like a man in a picture book, I'm that
bet that I hardly get a wink of sleep. I give you my word, Sir Pearce,
that I never heard the tune of Tipperary in my life till I came back
from Flanders; and already it's drove me to that pitch of tiredness
of it that when a poor little innocent slip of a boy in the street the
other night drew himself up and saluted and began whistling it at me, I
clouted his head for him, God forgive me.

SIR PEARCE [soothingly]. Yes, yes: I know. I know. One does get fed up
with it: I've been dog tired myself on parade many a time. But still,
you know, there's a gratifying side to it, too. After all, he is our
king; and it's our own country, isn't it?

O'FLAHERTY. Well, sir, to you that have an estate in it, it would feel
like your country. But the divil a perch of it ever I owned. And as to
the king: God help him, my mother would have taken the skin off my back
if I'd ever let on to have any other king than Parnell.

SIR PEARCE [rising, painfully shocked]. Your mother! What are you
dreaming about, O'Flaherty? A most loyal woman. Always most loyal.
Whenever there is an illness in the Royal Family, she asks me every
time we meet about the health of the patient as anxiously as if it were
yourself, her only son.

O'FLAHERTY. Well, she's my mother; and I won't utter a word agen her.
But I'm not saying a word of lie when I tell you that that old woman is
the biggest kanatt from here to the cross of Monasterboice. Sure she's
the wildest Fenian and rebel, and always has been, that ever taught a
poor innocent lad like myself to pray night and morning to St Patrick
to clear the English out of Ireland the same as he cleared the snakes.
You'll be surprised at my telling you that now, maybe, Sir Pearce?

SIR PEARCE [unable to keep still, walking away from O'Flaherty].
Surprised! I'm more than surprised, O'Flaherty. I'm overwhelmed.
[Turning and facing him.] Are you--are you joking?

O'FLAHERTY. If you'd been brought up by my mother, sir, you'd know
better than to joke about her. What I'm telling you is the truth; and I
wouldn't tell it to you if I could see my way to get out of the fix I'll
be in when my mother comes here this day to see her boy in his glory,
and she after thinking all the time it was against the English I was
fighting.

SIR PEARCE. Do you mean to say you told her such a monstrous falsehood
as that you were fighting in the German army?

O'FLAHERTY. I never told her one word that wasn't the truth and nothing
but the truth. I told her I was going to fight for the French and for
the Russians; and sure who ever heard of the French or the Russians
doing anything to the English but fighting them? That was how it was,
sir. And sure the poor woman kissed me and went about the house singing
in her old cracky voice that the French was on the sea, and they'd be
here without delay, and the Orange will decay, says the Shan Van Vocht.

SIR PEARCE [sitting down again, exhausted by his feelings]. Well, I
never could have believed this. Never. What do you suppose will happen
when she finds out?

O'FLAHERTY. She mustn't find out. It's not that she'd half kill me, as
big as I am and as brave as I am. It's that I'm fond of her, and can't
bring myself to break the heart in her. You may think it queer that a
man should be fond of his mother, sir, and she having bet him from the
time he could feel to the time she was too slow to ketch him; but I'm
fond of her; and I'm not ashamed of it. Besides, didn't she win the
Cross for me?

SIR PEARCE. Your mother! How?

O'FLAHERTY. By bringing me up to be more afraid of running away than of
fighting. I was timid by nature; and when the other boys hurted me, I'd
want to run away and cry. But she whaled me for disgracing the blood of
the O'Flahertys until I'd have fought the divil himself sooner than face
her after funking a fight. That was how I got to know that fighting was
easier than it looked, and that the others was as much afeard of me as
I was of them, and that if I only held out long enough they'd lose heart
and give rip. That's the way I came to be so courageous. I tell you, Sir
Pearce, if the German army had been brought up by my mother, the Kaiser
would be dining in the banqueting hall at Buckingham Palace this day,
and King George polishing his jack boots for him in the scullery.

SIR PEARCE. But I don't like this, O'Flaherty. You can't go on deceiving
your mother, you know. It's not right.

O'FLAHERTY. Can't go on deceiving her, can't I? It's little you know
what a son's love can do, sir. Did you ever notice what a ready liar I
am?

SIR PEARCE. Well, in recruiting a man gets carried away. I stretch it
a bit occasionally myself. After all, it's for king and country. But if
you won't mind my saying it, O'Flaherty, I think that story about
your fighting the Kaiser and the twelve giants of the Prussian guard
singlehanded would be the better for a little toning down. I don't ask
you to drop it, you know; for it's popular, undoubtedly; but still, the
truth is the truth. Don't you think it would fetch in almost as many
recruits if you reduced the number of guardsmen to six?

O'FLAHERTY. You're not used to telling lies like I am, sir. I got great
practice at home with my mother. What with saving my skin when I was
young and thoughtless, and sparing her feelings when I was old enough to
understand them, I've hardly told my mother the truth twice a year since
I was born; and would you have me turn round on her and tell it now,
when she's looking to have some peace and quiet in her old age?

SIR PEARCE [troubled in his conscience]. Well, it's not my affair, of
course, O'Flaherty. But hadn't you better talk to Father Quinlan about
it?

O'FLAHERTY. Talk to Father Quinlan, is it! Do you know what Father
Quinlan says to me this very morning?

SIR PEARCE. Oh, you've seen him already, have you? What did he say?

O'FLAHERTY. He says "You know, don't you," he says, "that it's your
duty, as a Christian and a good son of the Holy Church, to love your
enemies?" he says. "I know it's my juty as a soldier to kill them," I
says. "That's right, Dinny," he says: "quite right. But," says he, "you
can kill them and do them a good turn afterward to show your love for
them" he says; "and it's your duty to have a mass said for the souls of
the hundreds of Germans you say you killed," says he; "for many and many
of them were Bavarians and good Catholics," he says. "Is it me that must
pay for masses for the souls of the Boshes?" I says. "Let the King of
England pay for them," I says; "for it was his quarrel and not mine."

SIR PEARCE [warmly]. It is the quarrel of every honest man and true
patriot, O'Flaherty. Your mother must see that as clearly as I do.
After all, she is a reasonable, well disposed woman, quite capable of
understanding the right and the wrong of the war. Why can't you explain
to her what the war is about?

O'FLAHERTY. Arra, sir, how the divil do I know what the war is about?

SIR PEARCE [rising again and standing over him]. What! O'Flaherty: do
you know what you are saying? You sit there wearing the Victoria Cross
for having killed God knows how many Germans; and you tell me you don't
know why you did it!

O'FLAHERTY. Asking your pardon, Sir Pearce, I tell you no such thing. I
know quite well why I kilt them, because I was afeard that, if I didn't,
they'd kill me.

SIR PEARCE [giving it up, and sitting down again]. Yes, yes, of course;
but have you no knowledge of the causes of the war? of the interests
at stake? of the importance--I may almost say--in fact I will say--the
sacred right for which we are fighting? Don't you read the papers?

O'FLAHERTY. I do when I can get them. There's not many newsboys crying
the evening paper in the trenches. They do say, Sir Pearce, that
we shall never beat the Boshes until we make Horatio Bottomley Lord
Leftnant of England. Do you think that's true, sir?

SIR PEARCE. Rubbish, man! there's no Lord Lieutenant in England: the
king is Lord Lieutenant. It's a simple question of patriotism. Does
patriotism mean nothing to you?

O'FLAHERTY. It means different to me than what it would to you, sir. It
means England and England's king to you. To me and the like of me, it
means talking about the English just the way the English papers talk
about the Boshes. And what good has it ever done here in Ireland? It's
kept me ignorant because it filled up my mother's mind, and she thought
it ought to fill up mine too. It's kept Ireland poor, because instead
of trying to better ourselves we thought we was the fine fellows of
patriots when we were speaking evil of Englishmen that was as poor as
ourselves and maybe as good as ourselves. The Boshes I kilt was more
knowledgable men than me; and what better am I now that I've kilt them?
What better is anybody?

SIR PEARCE [huffed, turning a cold shoulder to him]. I am sorry the
terrible experience of this war--the greatest war ever fought--has
taught you no better, O'Flaherty.

O'FLAHERTY [preserving his dignity]. I don't know about it's being a
great war, sir. It's a big war; but that's not the same thing. Father
Quinlan's new church is a big church: you might take the little old
chapel out of the middle of it and not miss it. But my mother says there
was more true religion in the old chapel. And the war has taught me that
maybe she was right.

SIR PEARCE [grunts sulkily]!!

O'FLAHERTY [respectfully but doggedly]. And there's another thing it's
taught me too, sir, that concerns you and me, if I may make bold to tell
it to you.

SIR PEARCE [still sulky]. I hope it's nothing you oughtn't to say to me,
O'Flaherty.

O'FLAHERTY. It's this, sir: that I'm able to sit here now and talk to
you without humbugging you; and that's what not one of your tenants or
your tenants' childer ever did to you before in all your long life. It's
a true respect I'm showing you at last, sir. Maybe you'd rather have me
humbug you and tell you lies as I used, just as the boys here, God help
them, would rather have me tell them how I fought the Kaiser, that all
the world knows I never saw in my life, than tell them the truth. But
I can't take advantage of you the way I used, not even if I seem to be
wanting in respect to you and cocked up by winning the Cross.

SIR PEARCE [touched]. Not at all, O'Flaherty. Not at all.

O'FLAHERTY. Sure what's the Cross to me, barring the little pension it
carries? Do you think I don't know that there's hundreds of men as brave
as me that never had the luck to get anything for their bravery but a
curse from the sergeant, and the blame for the faults of them that ought
to have been their betters? I've learnt more than you'd think, sir;
for how would a gentleman like you know what a poor ignorant conceited
creature I was when I went from here into the wide world as a soldier?
What use is all the lying, and pretending, and humbugging, and letting
on, when the day comes to you that your comrade is killed in the trench
beside you, and you don't as much as look round at him until you trip
over his poor body, and then all you say is to ask why the hell the
stretcher-bearers don't take it out of the way. Why should I read the
papers to be humbugged and lied to by them that had the cunning to
stay at home and send me to fight for them? Don't talk to me or to any
soldier of the war being right. No war is right; and all the holy water
that Father Quinlan ever blessed couldn't make one right. There, sir!
Now you know what O'Flaherty V.C. thinks; and you're wiser so than the
others that only knows what he done.

SIR PEARCE [making the best of it, and turning goodhumoredly to him
again]. Well, what you did was brave and manly, anyhow.

O'FLAHERTY. God knows whether it was or not, better than you nor me,
General. I hope He won't be too hard on me for it, anyhow.

SIR PEARCE [sympathetically]. Oh yes: we all have to think seriously
sometimes, especially when we're a little run down. I'm afraid we've
been overworking you a bit over these recruiting meetings. However, we
can knock off for the rest of the day; and tomorrow's Sunday. I've
had about as much as I can stand myself. [He looks at his watch.] It's
teatime. I wonder what's keeping your mother.

O'FLAHERTY. It's nicely cocked up the old woman will be having tea at
the same table as you, sir, instead of in the kitchen. She'll be after
dressing in the heighth of grandeur; and stop she will at every house
on the way to show herself off and tell them where she's going, and fill
the whole parish with spite and envy. But sure, she shouldn't keep you
waiting, sir.

SIR PEARCE. Oh, that's all right: she must be indulged on an occasion
like this. I'm sorry my wife is in London: she'd have been glad to
welcome your mother.

O'FLAHERTY. Sure, I know she would, sir. She was always a kind friend to
the poor. Little her ladyship knew, God help her, the depth of divilment
that was in us: we were like a play to her. You see, sir, she was
English: that was how it was. We was to her what the Pathans and
Senegalese was to me when I first seen them: I couldn't think, somehow,
that they were liars, and thieves, and backbiters, and drunkards, just
like ourselves or any other Christians. Oh, her ladyship never knew all
that was going on behind her back: how would she? When I was a weeshy
child, she gave me the first penny I ever had in my hand; and I wanted
to pray for her conversion that night the same as my mother made me pray
for yours; and--

SIR PEARCE [scandalized]. Do you mean to say that your mother made you
pray for MY conversion?

O'FLAHERTY. Sure and she wouldn't want to see a gentleman like you going
to hell after she nursing your own son and bringing up my sister Annie
on the bottle. That was how it was, sir. She'd rob you; and she'd lie to
you; and she'd call down all the blessings of God on your head when she
was selling you your own three geese that you thought had been ate by
the fox the day after you'd finished fattening them, sir; and all the
time you were like a bit of her own flesh and blood to her. Often has
she said she'd live to see you a good Catholic yet, leading victorious
armies against the English and wearing the collar of gold that Malachi
won from the proud invader. Oh, she's the romantic woman is my mother,
and no mistake.

SIR PEARCE [in great perturbation]. I really can't believe this,
O'Flaherty. I could have sworn your mother was as honest a woman as ever
breathed.

O'FLAHERTY. And so she is, sir. She's as honest as the day.

SIR PEARCE. Do you call it honest to steal my geese?

O'FLAHERTY. She didn't steal them, sir. It was me that stole them.

SIR PEARCE. Oh! And why the devil did you steal them?

O'FLAHERTY. Sure we needed them, sir. Often and often we had to sell our
own geese to pay you the rent to satisfy your needs; and why shouldn't
we sell your geese to satisfy ours?

SIR PEARCE. Well, damn me!

O'FLAHERTY [sweetly]. Sure you had to get what you could out of us; and
we had to get what we could out of you. God forgive us both!

SIR PEARCE. Really, O'Flaherty, the war seems to have upset you a
little.

O'FLAHERTY. It's set me thinking, sir; and I'm not used to it. It's like
the patriotism of the English. They never thought of being patriotic
until the war broke out; and now the patriotism has took them so
sudden and come so strange to them that they run about like frightened
chickens, uttering all manner of nonsense. But please God they'll forget
all about it when the war's over. They're getting tired of it already.

SIR PEARCE. No, no: it has uplifted us all in a wonderful way. The world
will never be the same again, O'Flaherty. Not after a war like this.

O'FLAHERTY. So they all say, sir. I see no great differ myself. It's all
the fright and the excitement; and when that quiets down they'll go
back to their natural divilment and be the same as ever. It's like the
vermin: it'll wash off after a while.

SIR PEARCE [rising and planting himself firmly behind the garden seat].
Well, the long and the short of it is, O'Flaherty, I must decline to be
a party to any attempt to deceive your mother. I thoroughly disapprove
of this feeling against the English, especially at a moment like the
present. Even if your mother's political sympathies are really what you
represent them to be, I should think that her gratitude to Gladstone
ought to cure her of such disloyal prejudices.

O'FLAHERTY [over his shoulder]. She says Gladstone was an Irishman, Sir.
What call would he have to meddle with Ireland as he did if he wasn't?

SIR PEARCE. What nonsense! Does she suppose Mr Asquith is an Irishman?

O'FLAHERTY. She won't give him any credit for Home Rule, Sir. She says
Redmond made him do it. She says you told her so.

SIR PEARCE [convicted out of his own mouth]. Well, I never meant her to
take it up in that ridiculous way. [He moves to the end of the garden
seat on O'Flaherty's left.] I'll give her a good talking to when she
comes. I'm not going to stand any of her nonsense.

O'FLAHERTY. It's not a bit of use, sir. She says all the English
generals is Irish. She says all the English poets and great men was
Irish. She says the English never knew how to read their own books until
we taught them. She says we're the lost tribes of the house of Israel
and the chosen people of God. She says that the goddess Venus, that was
born out of the foam of the sea, came up out of the water in Killiney
Bay off Bray Head. She says that Moses built the seven churches, and
that Lazarus was buried in Glasnevin.

SIR PEARCE. Bosh! How does she know he was? Did you ever ask her?

O'FLAHERTY. I did, sir, often.

SIR PEARCE. And what did she say?

O'FLAHERTY. She asked me how did I know he wasn't, and fetched me a
clout on the side of my head.

SIR PEARCE. But have you never mentioned any famous Englishman to her,
and asked her what she had to say about him?

O'FLAHERTY. The only one I could think of was Shakespeare, sir; and she
says he was born in Cork.

SIR PEARCE [exhausted]. Well, I give it up [he throws himself into the
nearest chair]. The woman is--Oh, well! No matter.

O'FLAHERTY [sympathetically]. Yes, sir: she's pigheaded and obstinate:
there's no doubt about it. She's like the English: they think there's
no one like themselves. It's the same with the Germans, though they're
educated and ought to know better. You'll never have a quiet world till
you knock the patriotism out of the human race.

SIR PEARCE. Still, we--

O'FLAHERTY. Whisht, sir, for God's sake: here she is.

The General jumps up. Mrs. O'Flaherty arrives and comes between the
two men. She is very clean, and carefully dressed in the old fashioned
peasant costume; black silk sunbonnet with a tiara of trimmings, and
black cloak.

O'FLAHERTY [rising shyly]. Good evening, mother.

MRS O'FLAHERTY [severely]. You hold your whisht, and learn behavior
while I pay my juty to his honor. [To Sir Pearce, heartily.] And how
is your honor's good self? And how is her ladyship and all the young
ladies? Oh, it's right glad we are to see your honor back again and
looking the picture of health.

SIR PEARCE [forcing a note of extreme geniality]. Thank you, Mrs
O'Flaherty. Well, you see we've brought you back your son safe and
sound. I hope you're proud of him.

MRS O'FLAHERTY. And indeed and I am, your honor. It's the brave boy he
is; and why wouldn't he be, brought up on your honor's estate and with
you before his eyes for a pattern of the finest soldier in Ireland.
Come and kiss your old mother, Dinny darlint. [O'Flaherty does so
sheepishly.] That's my own darling boy. And look at your fine new
uniform stained already with the eggs you've been eating and the porter
you've been drinking. [She takes out her handkerchief: spits on it: and
scrubs his lapel with it.] Oh, it's the untidy slovenly one you always
were. There! It won't be seen on the khaki: it's not like the old red
coat that would show up everything that dribbled down on it. [To Sir
Pearce.] And they tell me down at the lodge that her ladyship is
staying in London, and that Miss Agnes is to be married to a fine young
nobleman. Oh, it's your honor that is the lucky and happy father! It
will be bad news for many of the young gentlemen of the quality round
here, sir. There's lots thought she was going to marry young Master
Lawless

SIR PEARCE. What! That--that--that bosthoon!

MRS O'FLAHERTY [hilariously]. Let your honor alone for finding the right
word! A big bosthoon he is indeed, your honor. Oh, to think of the times
and times I have said that Miss Agnes would be my lady as her mother was
before her! Didn't I, Dinny?

SIR PEARCE. And now, Mrs. O'Flaherty, I daresay you have a great deal to
say to Dennis that doesn't concern me. I'll just go in and order tea.

MRS O'FLAHERTY. Oh, why would your honor disturb yourself? Sure I can
take the boy into the yard.

SIR PEARCE. Not at all. It won't disturb me in the least. And he's too
big a boy to be taken into the yard now. He has made a front seat for
himself. Eh? [He goes into the house.]

MRS O'FLAHERTY. Sure he has that, your honor. God bless your honor! [The
General being now out of hearing, she turns threateningly to her
son with one of those sudden Irish changes of manner which amaze and
scandalize less flexible nations, and exclaims.] And what do you mean,
you lying young scald, by telling me you were going to fight agen the
English? Did you take me for a fool that couldn't find out, and the
papers all full of you shaking hands with the English king at Buckingham
Palace?

O'FLAHERTY. I didn't shake hands with him: he shook hands with me. Could
I turn on the man in his own house, before his own wife, with his money
in my pocket and in yours, and throw his civility back in his face?

MRS O'FLAHERTY. You would take the hand of a tyrant red with the blood
of Ireland--

O'FLAHERTY. Arra hold your nonsense, mother: he's not half the tyrant
you are, God help him. His hand was cleaner than mine that had the blood
of his own relations on it, maybe.

MRS O'FLAHERTY [threateningly]. Is that a way to speak to your mother,
you young spalpeen?

O'FLAHERTY [stoutly]. It is so, if you won't talk sense to me. It's a
nice thing for a poor boy to be made much of by kings and queens, and
shook hands with by the heighth of his country's nobility in the capital
cities of the world, and then to come home and be scolded and insulted
by his own mother. I'll fight for who I like; and I'll shake hands with
what kings I like; and if your own son is not good enough for you, you
can go and look for another. Do you mind me now?

MRS O'FLAHERTY. And was it the Belgians learned you such brazen
impudence?

O'FLAHERTY. The Belgians is good men; and the French ought to be more
civil to them, let alone their being half murdered by the Boshes.

MRS O'FLAHERTY. Good men is it! Good men! to come over here when they
were wounded because it was a Catholic country, and then to go to the
Protestant Church because it didn't cost them anything, and some of them
to never go near a church at all. That's what you call good men!

O'FLAHERTY. Oh, you're the mighty fine politician, aren't you? Much you
know about Belgians or foreign parts or the world you're living in, God
help you!

MRS O'FLAHERTY. Why wouldn't I know better than you? Amment I your
mother?

O'FLAHERTY. And if you are itself, how can you know what you never seen
as well as me that was dug into the continent of Europe for six months,
and was buried in the earth of it three times with the shells bursting
on the top of me? I tell you I know what I'm about. I have my own
reasons for taking part in this great conflict. I'd be ashamed to stay
at home and not fight when everybody else is fighting.

MRS O'FLAHERTY. If you wanted to fight, why couldn't you fight in the
German army?

O'FLAHERTY. Because they only get a penny a day.

MRS O'FLAHERTY. Well, and if they do itself, isn't there the French
army?

O'FLAHERTY. They only get a hapenny a day.

MRS O'FLAHERTY [much dashed]. Oh murder! They must be a mean lot, Dinny.

O'FLAHERTY [sarcastic]. Maybe you'd have me in the Turkish army, and
worship the heathen Mahomet that put a corn in his ear and pretended it
was a message from the heavens when the pigeon come to pick it out and
eat it. I went where I could get the biggest allowance for you; and
little thanks I get for it!

MRS O'FLAHERTY. Allowance, is it! Do you know what the thieving
blackguards did on me? They came to me and they says, "Was your son a
big eater?" they says. "Oh, he was that," says I: "ten shillings a week
wouldn't keep him." Sure I thought the more I said the more they'd give
me. "Then," says they, "that's ten shillings a week off your allowance,"
they says, "because you save that by the king feeding him." "Indeed!"
says I: "I suppose if I'd six sons, you'd stop three pound a week from
me, and make out that I ought to pay you money instead of you paying
me." "There's a fallacy in your argument," they says.

O'FLAHERTY. A what?

MRS O'FLAHERTY. A fallacy: that's the word he said. I says to him, "It's
a Pharisee I'm thinking you mean, sir; but you can keep your dirty money
that your king grudges a poor old widow; and please God the English will
be got yet for the deadly sin of oppressing the poor;" and with that I
shut the door in his face.

O'FLAHERTY [furious]. Do you tell me they knocked ten shillings off you
for my keep?

MRS O'FLAHERTY [soothing him]. No, darlint: they only knocked off half
a crown. I put up with it because I've got the old age pension; and they
know very well I'm only sixty-two; so I've the better of them by half a
crown a week anyhow.

O'FLAHERTY. It's a queer way of doing business. If they'd tell you
straight out what they was going to give you, you wouldn't mind; but if
there was twenty ways of telling the truth and only one way of telling a
lie, the Government would find it out. It's in the nature of governments
to tell lies.

Teresa Driscoll, a parlor maid, comes from the house,

TERESA. You're to come up to the drawing-room to have your tea, Mrs.
O'Flaherty.

MRS O'FLAHERTY. Mind you have a sup of good black tea for me in the
kitchen afterwards, acushla. That washy drawing-room tea will give me
the wind if I leave it on my stomach. [She goes into the house, leaving
the two young people alone together.]

O'FLAHERTY. Is that yourself, Tessie? And how are you?

TERESA. Nicely, thank you. And how's yourself?

O'FLAHERTY. Finely, thank God. [He produces a gold chain.] Look what
I've brought you, Tessie.

TERESA [shrinking]. Sure I don't like to touch it, Denny. Did you take
it off a dead man?

O'FLAHERTY. No: I took it off a live one; and thankful he was to me to
be alive and kept a prisoner in ease and comfort, and me left fighting
in peril of my life.

TERESA [taking it]. Do you think it's real gold, Denny?

O'FLAHERTY. It's real German gold, anyhow.

TERESA. But German silver isn't real, Denny.

O'FLAHERTY [his face darkening]. Well, it's the best the Bosh could do
for me, anyhow.

TERESA. Do you think I might take it to the jeweller next market day and
ask him?

O'FLAHERTY [sulkily]. You may take it to the divil if you like.

TERESA. You needn't lose your temper about it. I only thought I'd like
to know. The nice fool I'd look if I went about showing off a chain that
turned out to be only brass!

O'FLAHERTY. I think you might say Thank you.

TERESA. Do you? I think you might have said something more to me than
"Is that yourself?" You couldn't say less to the postman.

O'FLAHERTY [his brow clearing]. Oh, is that what's the matter? Here!
come and take the taste of ther brass out of my mouth. [He seizes her
and kisses her.]

Teresa, without losing her Irish dignity, takes the kiss as
appreciatively as a connoisseur might take a glass of wine, and sits
down with him on the garden seat,

TERESA [as he squeezes her waist]. Thank God the priest can't see us
here!

O'FLAHERTY. It's little they care for priests in France, alanna.

TERESA. And what had the queen on her, Denny, when she spoke to you in
the palace?

O'FLAHERTY. She had a bonnet on without any strings to it. And she had
a plakeen of embroidery down her bosom. And she had her waist where it
used to be, and not where the other ladies had it. And she had little
brooches in her ears, though she hadn't half the jewelry of Mrs Sullivan
that keeps the popshop in Drumpogue. And she dresses her hair down over
her forehead, in a fringe like. And she has an Irish look about her
eyebrows. And she didn't know what to say to me, poor woman! and I
didn't know what to say to her, God help me!

TERESA. You'll have a pension now with the Cross, won't you, Denny?

O'FLAHERTY. Sixpence three farthings a day.

TERESA. That isn't much.

O'FLAHERTY. I take out the rest in glory.

TERESA. And if you're wounded, you'll have a wound pension, won't you?

O'FLAHERTY. I will, please God.

TERESA. You're going out again, aren't you, Denny?

O'FLAHERTY. I can't help myself. I'd be shot for a deserter if I didn't
go; and maybe I'll be shot by the Boshes if I do go; so between the two
of them I'm nicely fixed up.

MRS O'FLAHERTY [calling from within the house]. Tessie! Tessie darlint!

TERESA [disengaging herself from his arm and rising]. I'm wanted for
the tea table. You'll have a pension anyhow, Denny, won't you, whether
you're wounded or not?

MRS O'FLAHERTY. Come, child, come.

TERESA [impatiently]. Oh, sure I'm coming. [She tries to smile at Denny,
not very convincingly, and hurries into the house.]

O'FLAHERTY [alone]. And if I do get a pension itself, the divil a penny
of it you'll ever have the spending of.

MRS O'FLAHERTY [as she comes from the porch]. Oh, it's a shame for you
to keep the girl from her juties, Dinny. You might get her into trouble.

O'FLAHERTY. Much I care whether she gets into trouble or not! I pity the
man that gets her into trouble. He'll get himself into worse.

MRS O'FLAHERTY. What's that you tell me? Have you been falling out with
her, and she a girl with a fortune of ten pounds?

O'FLAHERTY. Let her keep her fortune. I wouldn't touch her with the
tongs if she had thousands and millions.

MRS O'FLAHERTY. Oh fie for shame, Dinny! why would you say the like of
that of a decent honest girl, and one of the Driscolls too?

O'FLAHERTY. Why wouldn't I say it? She's thinking of nothing but to get
me out there again to be wounded so that she may spend my pension, bad
scran to her!

MRS O'FLAHERTY. Why, what's come over you, child, at all at all?

O'FLAHERTY. Knowledge and wisdom has come over me with pain and fear
and trouble. I've been made a fool of and imposed upon all my life. I
thought that covetious sthreal in there was a walking angel; and now if
ever I marry at all I'll marry a Frenchwoman.

MRS O'FLARERTY [fiercely]. You'll not, so; and don't you dar repeat such
a thing to me.

O'FLAHERTY. Won't I, faith! I've been as good as married to a couple of
them already.

MRS O'FLAHERTY. The Lord be praised, what wickedness have you been up
to, you young blackguard?

O'FLAHERTY. One of them Frenchwomen would cook you a meal twice in the
day and all days and every day that Sir Pearce himself might go begging
through Ireland for, and never see the like of. I'll have a French wife,
I tell you; and when I settle down to be a farmer I'll have a French
farm, with a field as big as the continent of Europe that ten of your
dirty little fields here wouldn't so much as fill the ditch of.

MRS O'FLAHERTY [furious]. Then it's a French mother you may go look for;
for I'm done with you.

O'FLAHERTY. And it's no great loss you'd be if it wasn't for my natural
feelings for you; for it's only a silly ignorant old countrywoman you
are with all your fine talk about Ireland: you that never stepped beyond
the few acres of it you were born on!

MRS O'FLAHERTY [tottering to the garden seat and showing signs of
breaking down]. Dinny darlint, why are you like this to me? What's
happened to you?

O'FLAHERTY [gloomily]. What's happened to everybody? that's what I want
to know. What's happened to you that I thought all the world of and was
afeard of? What's happened to Sir Pearce, that I thought was a great
general, and that I now see to be no more fit to command an army than an
old hen? What's happened to Tessie, that I was mad to marry a year ago,
and that I wouldn't take now with all Ireland for her fortune? I tell
you the world's creation is crumbling in ruins about me; and then you
come and ask what's happened to me?

MRS O'FLAHERTY [giving way to wild grief]. Ochone! ochone! my son's
turned agen me. Oh, what'll I do at all at all? Oh! oh! oh! oh!

SIR PEARCE [running out of the house]. What's this infernal noise? What
on earth is the matter?

O'FLAHERTY. Arra hold your whisht, mother. Don't you see his honor?

MRS O'FLAHERTY. Oh, Sir, I'm ruined and destroyed. Oh, won't you
speak to Dinny, Sir: I'm heart scalded with him. He wants to marry a
Frenchwoman on me, and to go away and be a foreigner and desert his
mother and betray his country. It's mad he is with the roaring of the
cannons and he killing the Germans and the Germans killing him, bad cess
to them! My boy is taken from me and turned agen me; and who is to take
care of me in my old age after all I've done for him, ochone! ochone!

O'FLAHERTY. Hold your noise, I tell you. Who's going to leave you? I'm
going to take you with me. There now: does that satisfy you?

MRS O'FLAHERTY. Is it take me into a strange land among heathens and
pagans and savages, and me not knowing a word of their language nor them
of mine?

O'FLAHERTY. A good job they don't: maybe they'll think you're talking
sense.

MRS O'FLAHERTY. Ask me to die out of Ireland, is it? and the angels not
to find me when they come for me!

O'FLAHERTY. And would you ask me to live in Ireland where I've been
imposed on and kept in ignorance, and to die where the divil himself
wouldn't take me as a gift, let alone the blessed angels? You can come
or stay. You can take your old way or take my young way. But stick in
this place I will not among a lot of good-for-nothing divils that'll not
do a hand's turn but watch the grass growing and build up the stone wall
where the cow walked through it. And Sir Horace Plunkett breaking his
heart all the time telling them how they might put the land into decent
tillage like the French and Belgians.

SIR PEARCE. Yes, he's quite right, you know, Mrs O'Flaherty: quite right
there.

MRS O'FLAHERTY. Well, sir, please God the war will last a long time yet;
and maybe I'll die before it's over and the separation allowance stops.

O'FLAHERTY. That's all you care about. It's nothing but milch cows we
men are for the women, with their separation allowances, ever since the
war began, bad luck to them that made it!

TERESA [coming from the porch between the General and Mrs O'Flaherty.]
Hannah sent me out for to tell you, sir, that the tea will be black and
the cake not fit to eat with the cold if yous all don't come at wanst.

MRS O'FLAHERTY [breaking out again]. Oh, Tessie darlint, what have you
been saying to Dinny at all at all? Oh! Oh--

SIR PEARCE [out of patience]. You can't discuss that here. We shall have
Tessie beginning now.

O'FLAHERTY. That's right, sir: drive them in.

TERESA. I haven't said a word to him. He--

SIR PEARCE. Hold your tongue; and go in and attend to your business at
the tea table.

TERESA. But amment I telling your honor that I never said a word to him?
He gave me a beautiful gold chain. Here it is to show your honor that
it's no lie I'm telling you.

SIR PEARCE. What's this, O'Flaherty? You've been looting some
unfortunate officer.

O'FLAHERTY. No, sir: I stole it from him of his own accord.

MRS O'FLAHERTY. Wouldn't your honor tell him that his mother has the
first call on it? What would a slip of a girl like that be doing with a
gold chain round her neck?

TERESA [venomously]. Anyhow, I have a neck to put it round and not a
hank of wrinkles.

At this unfortunate remark, Mrs O'Flaherty bounds from her seat: and
an appalling tempest of wordy wrath breaks out. The remonstrances and
commands of the General, and the protests and menaces of O'Flaherty,
only increase the hubbub. They are soon all speaking at once at the top
of their voices.

MRS O'FLAHERTY [solo]. You impudent young heifer, how dar you say such a
thing to me? [Teresa retorts furiously: the men interfere: and the solo
becomes a quartet, fortissimo.] I've a good mind to clout your ears for
you to teach you manners. Be ashamed of yourself, do; and learn to know
who you're speaking to. That I maytn't sin! but I don't know what the
good God was thinking about when he made the like of you. Let me not see
you casting sheep's eyes at my son again. There never was an O'Flaherty
yet that would demean himself by keeping company with a dirty Driscoll;
and if I see you next or nigh my house I'll put you in the ditch with a
flea in your ear: mind that now.

TERESA. Is it me you offer such a name to, you fou-mouthed,
dirty-minded, lying, sloothering old sow, you? I wouldn't soil my tongue
by calling you in your right name and telling Sir Pearce what's the
common talk of the town about you. You and your O'Flahertys! setting
yourself up agen the Driscolls that would never lower themselves to be
seen in conversation with you at the fair. You can keep your ugly stingy
lump of a son; for what is he but a common soldier? and God help
the girl that gets him, say I! So the back of my hand to you, Mrs
O'Flaherty; and that the cat may tear your ugly old face!

SIR PEARCE. Silence. Tessie, did you hear me ordering you to go into the
house? Mrs O'Flaherty! [Louder.] Mrs O'Flaherty!! Will you just listen
to me one moment? Please. [Furiously.] Do you hear me speaking to you,
woman? Are you human beings or are you wild beasts? Stop that noise
immediately: do you hear? [Yelling.] Are you going to do what I order
you, or are you not? Scandalous! Disgraceful! This comes of being too
familiar with you. O'Flaherty, shove them into the house. Out with the
whole damned pack of you.

O'FLAHERTY [to the women]. Here now: none of that, none of that. Go
easy, I tell you. Hold your whisht, mother, will you, or you'll be sorry
for it after. [To Teresa.] Is that the way for a decent young girl to
speak? [Despairingly.] Oh, for the Lord's sake, shut up, will yous? Have
you no respect for yourselves or your betters? [Peremptorily.] Let me
have no more of it, I tell you. Och! the divil's in the whole crew of
you. In with you into the house this very minute and tear one another's
eyes out in the kitchen if you like. In with you.

The two men seize the two women, and push them, still violently abusing
one another, into the house. Sir Pearce slams the door upon them
savagely. Immediately a heavenly silence falls on the summer afternoon.
The two sit down out of breath: and for a long time nothing is said. Sir
Pearce sits on an iron chair. O'Flaherty sits on the garden seat. The
thrush begins to sing melodiously. O'Flaherty cocks his ears, and looks
up at it. A smile spreads over his troubled features. Sir Pearce, with a
long sigh, takes out his pipe and begins to fill it.

O'FLAHERTY [idyllically]. What a discontented sort of an animal a man
is, sir! Only a month ago, I was in the quiet of the country out at the
front, with not a sound except the birds and the bellow of a cow in the
distance as it might be, and the shrapnel making little clouds in the
heavens, and the shells whistling, and maybe a yell or two when one of
us was hit; and would you believe it, sir, I complained of the noise and
wanted to have a peaceful hour at home. Well: them two has taught me a
lesson. This morning, sir, when I was telling the boys here how I was
longing to be back taking my part for king and country with the others,
I was lying, as you well knew, sir. Now I can go and say it with a clear
conscience. Some likes war's alarums; and some likes home life. I've
tried both, sir; and I'm for war's alarums now. I always was a quiet lad
by natural disposition.

SIR PEARCE. Strictly between ourselves, O'Flaherty, and as one soldier
to another [O'Flaherty salutes, but without stiffening], do you think we
should have got an army without conscription if domestic life had been
as happy as people say it is?

O'FLAHERTY. Well, between you and me and the wall, Sir Pearce, I think
the less we say about that until the war's over, the better.

He winks at the General. The General strikes a match. The thrush sings.
A jay laughs. The conversation drops.



