
                        THE SNOW-IMAGE

                             AND

                     OTHER TWICE-TOLD TALES



                        SYLPH ETHEREGE

                              By

                      Nathaniel Hawthorne



On a bright summer evening, two persons stood among the shrubbery of a
garden, stealthily watching a young girl, who sat in the window seat of a
neighboring mansion.  One of these unseen observers, a gentleman, was
youthful, and had an air of high breeding and refinement, and a face
marked with intellect, though otherwise of unprepossessing aspect.  His
features wore even an ominous, though somewhat mirthful expression, while
he pointed his long forefinger at the girl, and seemed to regard her as a
creature completely within the scope of his influence.

"The charm works!" said he, in a low, but emphatic whisper.

"Do you know, Edward Hamilton,--since so you choose to be named,--do you
know," said the lady beside him, "that I have almost a mind to break the
spell at once?  What if the lesson should prove too severe!  True, if my
ward could be thus laughed out of her fantastic nonsense, she might be
the better for it through life.  But then, she is such a delicate
creature!  And, besides, are you not ruining your own chance, by putting
forward this shadow of a rival?"

"But will he not vanish into thin air, at my bidding?"  rejoined Edward
Hamilton.  "Let the charm work!"

The girl's slender and sylph-like figure, tinged with radiance from the
sunset clouds, and overhung with the rich drapery of the silken curtains,
and set within the deep frame of the window, was a perfect picture; or,
rather, it was like the original loveliness in a painter's fancy, from
which the most finished picture is but an imperfect copy.  Though her
occupation excited so much interest in the two spectators, she was merely
gazing at a miniature which she held in her hand, encased in white satin
and red morocco; nor did there appear to be any other cause for the smile
of mockery and malice with which Hamilton regarded her.

"The charm works!" muttered he, again.  "Our pretty Sylvia's scorn will
have a dear retribution!"

At this moment the girl raised her eyes, and, instead of a life-like
semblance of the miniature, beheld the ill-omened shape of Edward
Hamilton, who now stepped forth from his concealment in the shrubbery.

Sylvia Etherege was an orphan girl, who had spent her life, till within a
few months past, under the guardianship, and in the secluded dwelling, of
an old bachelor uncle.  While yet in her cradle, she had been the
destined bride of a cousin, who was no less passive in the betrothal than
herself.  Their future union had been projected, as the means of uniting
two rich estates, and was rendered highly expedient, if not
indispensable, by the testamentary dispositions of the parents on both
sides.  Edgar Vaughan, the promised bridegroom, had been bred from
infancy in Europe, and had never seen the beautiful girl whose heart he
was to claim as his inheritance.  But already, for several years, a
correspondence had been kept up between tine cousins, and had produced an
intellectual intimacy, though it could but imperfectly acquaint them with
each other's character.

Sylvia was shy, sensitive, and fanciful; and her guardian's secluded
habits had shut her out from even so much of the world as is generally
open to maidens of her age.  She had been left to seek associates and
friends for herself in the haunts of imagination, and to converse with
them, sometimes in the language of dead poets, oftener in the poetry of
her own mind.  The companion whom she chiefly summoned up was the cousin
with whose idea her earliest thoughts had been connected.  She made a
vision of Edgar Vaughan, and tinted it with stronger hues than a mere
fancy-picture, yet graced it with so many bright and delicate
perfections, that her cousin could nowhere have encountered so dangerous
a rival.  To this shadow she cherished a romantic fidelity.  With its
airy presence sitting by her side, or gliding along her favorite paths,
the loneliness of her young life was blissful; her heart was satisfied
with love, while yet its virgin purity was untainted by the earthliness
that the touch of a real lover would have left there.  Edgar Vaughan
seemed to be conscious of her character; for, in his letters, he gave her
a name that was happily appropriate to the sensitiveness of her
disposition, the delicate peculiarity of her manners, and the ethereal
beauty both of her mind and person.  Instead of Sylvia, he called her
Sylph,--with the prerogative of a cousin and a lover,--his dear Sylph
Etherege.

When Sylvia was seventeen, her guardian died, and she passed under the
care of Mrs. Grosvenor, a lady of wealth and fashion, and Sylvia's
nearest relative, though a distant one.  While an inmate of Mrs.
Grosvenor's family, she still preserved somewhat of her life-long habits
of seclusion, and shrank from a too familiar intercourse with those
around her.  Still, too, she was faithful to her cousin, or to the shadow
which bore his name.

The time now drew near when Edgar Vaughan, whose education had been
completed by an extensive range of travel, was to revisit the soil of his
nativity.  Edward Hamilton, a young gentleman, who had been Vaughan's
companion, both in his studies and rambles, had already recrossed the
Atlantic, bringing letters to Mrs. Grosvenor and Sylvia Etherege.  These
credentials insured him an earnest welcome, which, however, on Sylvia's
part, was not followed by personal partiality, or even the regard that
seemed due to her cousin's most intimate friend.  As she herself could
have assigned no cause for her repugnance, it might be termed
instinctive.  Hamilton's person, it is true, was the reverse of
attractive, especially when beheld for the first time.  Yet, in the eyes
of the most fastidious judges, the defect of natural grace was
compensated by the polish of his manners, and by the intellect which so
often gleamed through his dark features.  Mrs. Grosvenor, with whom he
immediately became a prodigious favorite, exerted herself to overcome
Sylvia's dislike.  But, in this matter, her ward could neither be
reasoned with nor persuaded.  The presence of Edward Hamilton was sure to
render her cold, shy, and distant, abstracting all the vivacity from her
deportment, as if a cloud had come betwixt her and the sunshine.

The simplicity of Sylvia's demeanor rendered it easy for so keen an
observer as Hamilton to detect her feelings.  Whenever any slight
circumstance made him sensible of them, a smile might be seen to flit
over the young man's sallow visage.  None, that had once beheld this
smile, were in any danger of forgetting it; whenever they recalled to
memory the features of Edward Hamilton, they were always duskily
illuminated by this expression of mockery and malice.

In a few weeks after Hamilton's arrival, he presented to Sylvia Etherege
a miniature of her cousin, which, as he informed her, would have been
delivered sooner, but was detained with a portion of his baggage.  This
was the miniature in the contemplation of which we beheld Sylvia so
absorbed, at the commencement of our story.  Such, in truth, was too
often the habit of the shy and musing girl.  The beauty of the pictured
countenance was almost too perfect to represent a human creature, that
had been born of a fallen and world-worn race, and had lived to manhood
amid ordinary troubles and enjoyments, and must become wrinkled with age
and care.  It seemed too bright for a thing formed of dust, and doomed to
crumble into dust again.  Sylvia feared that such a being would be too
refined and delicate to love a simple girl like her.  Yet, even while her
spirit drooped with that apprehension, the picture was but the masculine
counterpart of Sylph Etherege's sylphlike beauty.  There was that
resemblance between her own face and the miniature which is said often to
exist between lovers whom Heaven has destined for each other, and which,
in this instance, might be owing to the kindred blood of the two parties.
Sylvia felt, indeed, that there was something familiar in the
countenance, so like a friend did the eyes smile upon her, and seem to
imply a knowledge of her thoughts.  She could account for this impression
only by supposing that, in some of her day-dreams, imagination had
conjured up the true similitude of her distant and unseen lover.

But now could Sylvia give a brighter semblance of reality to those
day-dreams.  Clasping the miniature to her heart, she could summon forth,
from that haunted cell of pure and blissful fantasies, the life-like
shadow, to roam with her in the moonlight garden.  Even at noontide it
sat with her in the arbor, when the sunshine threw its broken flakes of
gold into the clustering shade.  The effect upon her mind was hardly less
powerful than if she had actually listened to, and reciprocated, the vows
of Edgar Vaughan; for, though the illusion never quite deceived her, yet
the remembrance was as distinct as of a remembered interview.  Those
heavenly eyes gazed forever into her soul, which drank at them as at a
fountain, and was disquieted if reality threw a momentary cloud between.
She heard the melody of a voice breathing sentiments with which her own
chimed in like music.  O happy, yet hapless girl!  Thus to create the
being whom she loves, to endow him with all the attributes that were most
fascinating to her heart, and then to flit with the airy creature into
the realm of fantasy and moonlight, where dwelt his dreamy kindred!  For
her lover wiled Sylvia away from earth, which seemed strange, and dull,
and darksome, and lured her to a country where her spirit roamed in
peaceful rapture, deeming that it had found its home.  Many, in their
youth, have visited that land of dreams, and wandered so long in its
enchanted groves, that, when banished thence, they feel like exiles
everywhere.

The dark-browed Edward Hamilton, like the villain of a tale, would often
glide through the romance wherein poor Sylvia walked.  Sometimes, at the
most blissful moment of her ecstasy, when the features of the miniature
were pictured brightest in the air, they would suddenly change, and
darken, and be transformed into his visage.  And always, when such change
occurred, the intrusive visage wore that peculiar smile with which
Hamilton had glanced at Sylvia.

Before the close of summer, it was told Sylvia Etherege that Vaughan had
arrived from France, and that she would meet him--would meet, for the
first time, the loved of years--that very evening.  We will not tell how
often and how earnestly she gazed upon the miniature, thus endeavoring to
prepare herself for the approaching interview, lest the throbbing of her
timorous heart should stifle the words of welcome.  While the twilight
grew deeper and duskier, she sat with Mrs. Grosvenor in an inner
apartment, lighted only by the softened gleam from an alabaster lamp,
which was burning at a distance on the centre-table of the drawing-room.
Never before had Sylph Etherege looked so sylph-like.  She had communed
with a creature of imagination, till her own loveliness seemed but the
creation of a delicate and dreamy fancy.  Every vibration of her spirit
was visible in her frame, as she listened to the rattling of wheels and
the tramp upon the pavement, and deemed that even the breeze bore the
sound of her lover's footsteps, as if he trode upon the viewless air.
Mrs. Grosvenor, too, while she watched the tremulous flow of Sylvia's
feelings, was deeply moved; she looked uneasily at the agitated girl, and
was about to speak, when the opening of the street-door arrested the
words upon her lips.

Footsteps ascended the staircase, with a confident and familiar tread,
and some one entered the drawing-room.  From the sofa where they sat, in
the inner apartment, Mrs. Grosvenor and Sylvia could not discern the
visitor.

"Sylph!" cried a voice.  "Dearest Sylph!  Where are you, sweet Sylph
Etherege?  Here is your Edgar Vaughan!"

But instead of answering, or rising to meet her lover,--who had greeted
her by the sweet and fanciful name, which, appropriate as it was to her
character, was known only to him,--Sylvia grasped Mrs. Grosvenor's arm,
while her whole frame shook with the throbbing of her heart.

"Who is it?" gasped she.  "Who calls me Sylph?"

Before Mrs. Grosvenor could reply, the stranger entered the room, bearing
the lamp in his hand.  Approaching the sofa, he displayed to Sylvia the
features of Edward Hamilton, illuminated by that evil smile, from which
his face derived so marked an individuality.

"Is not the miniature an admirable likeness?" inquired he.

Sylvia shuddered, but had not power to turn away her white face from his
gaze.  The miniature, which she had been holding in her hand, fell down
upon the floor, where Hamilton, or Vaughan, set his foot upon it, and
crushed the ivory counterfeit to fragments.

"There, my sweet Sylph," he exclaimed.  "It was I that created your
phantom-lover, and now I annihilate him!  Your dream is rudely broken.
Awake, Sylph Etherege, awake to truth!  I am the only Edgar Vaughan!"

"We have gone too far, Edgar Vaughan," said Mrs. Grosvenor, catching
Sylvia in her arms.  The revengeful freak, which Vaughan's wounded vanity
had suggested, had been countenanced by this lady, in the hope of curing
Sylvia of her romantic notions, and reconciling her to the truths and
realities of life.  "Look at the poor child!" she continued.  "I protest
I tremble for the consequences!"

"Indeed, madam!" replied Vaughan, sneeringly, as he threw the light of
the lamp on Sylvia's closed eyes and marble features.  "Well, my
conscience is clear.  I did but look into this delicate creature's heart;
and with the pure fantasies that I found there, I made what seemed a
man,--and the delusive shadow has wiled her away to Shadow-land, and
vanished there!  It is no new tale.  Many a sweet maid has shared the lot
of poor Sylph Etherege!"

"And now, Edgar Vaughan," said Mrs. Grosvenor, as Sylvia's heart began
faintly to throb again, "now try, in good earnest, to win back her love
from the phantom which you conjured up.  If you succeed, she will be the
better, her whole life long, for the lesson we have given her."

Whether the result of the lesson corresponded with Mrs. Grosvenor's
hopes, may be gathered from the closing scene of our story.  It had been
made known to the fashionable world that Edgar Vaughan had returned from
France, and, under the assumed name of Edward Hamilton, had won the
affections of the lovely girl to whom he had been affianced in his
boyhood.  The nuptials were to take place at an early date.  One evening,
before the day of anticipated bliss arrived, Edgar Vaughan entered Mrs.
Grosvenor's drawing-room, where he found that lady and Sylph Etherege.

"Only that Sylvia makes no complaint," remarked Mrs. Grosvenor, "I should
apprehend that the town air is ill-suited to her constitution.  She was
always, indeed, a delicate creature; but now she is a mere gossamer.  Do
but look at her!  Did you ever imagine anything so fragile?"

Vaughan was already attentively observing his mistress, who sat in a
shadowy and moonlighted recess of the room, with her dreamy eyes fixed
steadfastly upon his own.  The bough of a tree was waving before the
window, and sometimes enveloped her in the gloom of its shadow, into
which she seemed to vanish.

"Yes," he said, to Mrs. Grosvenor.  "I can scarcely deem her of the
earth, earthy.  No wonder that I call her Sylph!  Methinks she will fade
into the moonlight, which falls upon her through the window.  Or, in the
open air, she might flit away upon the breeze, like a wreath of mist!"

Sylvia's eyes grew yet brighter.  She waved her hand to Edgar Vaughan,
with a gesture of ethereal triumph.

"Farewell!" she said.  "I will neither fade into the moonlight, nor flit
away upon the breeze.  Yet you cannot keep me here!"

There was something in Sylvia's look and tones that startled Mrs.
Grosvenor with a terrible apprehension.  But, as she was rushing towards
the girl, Vaughan held her back.

"Stay!" cried he, with a strange smile of mockery and anguish.  "Can our
sweet Sylph be going to heaven, to seek the original of the miniature?"





